Okay, the State Board will convene and we'll start with a Pledge of Allegiance.
Good.
Unfortunately for the audience, since we have a one-day meeting and we have a closed session, we usually do this before the second day, I'm going to have to ask you to leave the room so we can do our closed session and then come back in.
Sorry very much for that, but no way other we can handle it.
Okay, before we have the superintendent's report, I have my own announcement, which I will present right after I say that with the board heard in closed session, the MSC case.
Next week, my colleagues Patricia Rucker and Ting Sung will appear before the Senate Rules Committee on their confirmation hearing.
And I know they'll do a great job and are really great experts in California education.
Governor Brown also reappointed me in January and typically I would be going with them answering questions at the hearing as well.
But after careful consideration and after weighing a lot of factors, I've decided not to go through the reconfirmation process.
As many of you know, I was first appointed to the board in 1975 under Governor Brown after working with him in the 1974 campaign.
And I ended up advising him on education policy over the next 44 years, including his stints as mayor of Oakland.
So Governor Brown and I, I think, have enjoyed a rare working relationship.
I'm not sure how many other people have served all four of Governor Brown's terms in office.
So it is rare by definition, I guess.
Of that period, the last eight years have been the most productive.
We've accomplished a major overhaul of public education, including standards, assessment, accountability, and capacity building.
It's a remarkable record, I think, in some ways, and a lot of factors fell into place, including a really good budget situation to bring that about.
So with a new governor in 2019, I just don't see how I could share the same relationship with him or her, and I couldn't share that, have the same kind of experience since we never, we wouldn't have met somehow in 1974.
So it is my decision to leave the board simultaneously with Governor Brown leaving office.
I'm not retiring from education policy in California.
There may be some more books.
There'll certainly be some more writing.
I think I'll give more advice and take less as we go forward.
And so I just wanted all of you to know why I'm not going to be at next week's reconfirmation hearing.
So that concludes my statement.
And now I'll have the superintendent.
Good morning, and President Kurz, that's hard to follow because it's with some emotion that we, you know, greet this this news because of your incredible leadership, your experience, your patience, your drive to get things right, to get things better.
So I just wanted to say how much our friendship has meant to me and I'm sure to you.
And I know all of us really respect your work and are so grateful for
the time.
Now, you may have set a record on years on the State Board.
Are you at 18?
17?
No, I'll be 15.
15?
Yeah, 15.
You sure you don't want to stay another five years and round it out to 20?
No, but my last meeting will be January, and we still have a lot of work to do, as you well know.
Indeed.
But thank you President Kurzweil for everything you've done for education.
It's amazing and we look forward to the books, right?
Yeah.
Invite us to the book signings, okay?
Well, it's the end of a school year.
It's a sort of a transition to the end of the school year with
a lot of celebration of what's been accomplished during the year, a lot of hope for the future, a lot of thinking about the future and the roadmap ahead on so many fronts.
With the change that President Kirsch just referred to, there's a lot of work yet to do to implement the goals and create sustainable programs that come from the work you've all done together, we've all done together with the education community.
I'll start out with mentioning we had the exemplary schools, the Distinguished School Awards Program,
Went back to the Anaheim Conference Center at Disney.
You know, it was fantastic seeing 1,500 incredibly motivated, awe-inspiring teachers there.
High positive spirit and high hopes for the future.
I had the privilege of shaking hands with all 1,500.
I was on stage for five and a half hours.
And I did photo shoots with everybody.
Eileen was there and we did a couple of photo shoots with her and Mickey Mouse.
But just again, inspirational.
288 elementary schools were honored.
I want to thank Tish McLeod and the CDE team that helped put this event together.
Teachers don't get enough, educators don't get enough pats on the back or recognition for what they do.
And so it was a very special night.
And we had student performances, Eileen may comment later, that were just incredible in terms of drama, plays, music, and creativity through the arts.
So we were very pleased.
We also recognize Civic Excellence Awards and the Arts Excellence Awards.
I wanted to mention we also had the privilege of the last few weeks of visiting schools around the state that are green ribbon schools.
Again, incredible work by young people understanding the threat to our environment, understanding the precious nature of our natural resources, and understanding carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen cycles, and food chains.
And I visited one school where one of our Teachers of the Year
Greg Gardner has a fantastic science program.
He involves the top science students and special needs students integrated together in the same class.
They are raising trout to put up in streams and lakes, different parts of the Sierra.
I got to do a needle implant of a
tag where they're tracking fish populations.
So the white sea bass is endangered or threatened.
And so the students are doing a tracking system.
So they were taking hundreds of these fish and putting a little tag that you can see under a microscope.
And it was hands-on, minds-on.
kind of learning.
They also were raising tilapia, which they have fish fries regularly because they can't release the tilapia in salt water and it's too far to take it to warm waters in the Philippines or somewhere like that.
And they're growing their own food, hydroponics.
Just one thing after the next, conserving resources, cutting down waste,
Some schools with virtually no trash to get rid of.
They recycle everything.
Again, just a wonderful time.
We went to Top of the World at Laguna Beach as well as Edison at Huntington Beach and saw amazing work by these students.
We have a couple of good news grants to let you know about.
The Department of Education, we work very hard with Assemblymember Shirley Weber and last year the legislature and the governor
supported $2.5 million on equity grants where we're really focusing on the achievement gap, focusing on Latino and African American students in particular to close that gap.
And so San Diego County was one of the main recipients and Santa Clara County was one of the main recipients.
But it's not just for their counties.
Each of these grant awardees are creating a team of other districts in their region
to accomplish their goals.
We had emergency grants.
Secretary DeVos called me directly personally to give us the good news.
We got $14 million in relief grants for the damage and the tragedies that occurred during the fires and the floods.
I was pleased and thanked her for putting in $2 million of that we requested.
for mental health to help, again, our students and their parents and their families recover from the tragedies of this past year.
I want to thank Marguerite Reese, who was our federal liaison, who helped negotiate, put out the grant application, and did a great job.
I want to mention that classified employees, we're having a recognition ceremony for them.
We know the schools can't run.
My mom was a school secretary, so she always reminded me when I was a teacher.
The secretaries run the schools, and all the other classified make things go.
Right, Eileen?
And those of you who've been in the classroom and in administration know that.
So you're invited on May 27.
We're going to have a nice luncheon to recognize six exemplary and outstanding classified employees.
Finally, a couple of notes on bilingual education.
One of those is yesterday I signed for California Department of Education and Mexico's education ministry sent a representative.
We had a signing of an MOU to talk about friendship, intercambio relationships, and more concerted efforts to respond to the huge need for bilingual education teachers.
And we focused on the students we share.
We're 50,000 students in Mexico studying there today.
Came from the United States.
They were born here.
They're citizens.
But they went back with their parents, and they don't speak Spanish.
They're not fluent in the native language of their parents.
So again, a mutual challenge.
We've forged this alliance, and we're moving forward together.
Finally, I want to mention that with the success of Prop 58, which still amazes me that 73% of Californians embraced the global world we live in and understood the need to
know more than one language, and by knowing a language, you know the people, you know the culture, you have ways of building bridges and working together.
So on May 30th, I'm going to make a major announcement about a goal I'm setting and urging us all to work together towards.
It'll be at Koalinga Elementary School in Los Angeles.
It's a Korean dual immersion program.
So you're invited to come to that one in Los Angeles if you're
in the area.
And so I ended up emphasizing several times.
I said it in Spanish.
Debemos construir puentes, no muros.
It's time to build more bridges, no walls.
So that's my report.
And let's keep moving forward.
Adelante.
Okay, well, we will move forward.
And I'd like to introduce Sandra Hernandez.
Can you stand up, Sandra?
Yes.
Who is recently joined the SBE office as a spring intern.
through their University of California Center Sacramento program.
Sandra is an undergraduate at UC Davis majoring in communications, and she is working and helping us on the Early Math Project.
You'll hear more about this over the next coming months, and in 2018 Early Math Symposium.
And she also works with Janet Weeks on communications.
So she'll be here until the latter part of June.
And please join me in welcoming her.
We have two public charter hearings on the agenda, items 11 and 12.
We have the regular consent items as well, which include at this point items 5 through 9.
Waiver consent items, W1 through.
and W3 through W14.
We're scheduled only to hear W2 at this juncture.
I'm going to announce to the board members that if you wish to remove items, please remove from the consent and waiver consent items as well.
Then just advise our executive director by 12 o'clock today.
Now for health communications and other procedural matters, letters from the public on matters before the board are in your electronic folder.
We have one print copy located in the lobby.
All speakers, please sign in at the table just outside the room and identify the item number on which you would like to speak.
And also, when you come to speak, give some identification of who you represent or if you're representing yourself or whatever.
Let us know what your backgrounds are.
If you want to hand us something to read during the meeting, please provide at least 25 copies.
And then we will have one minute per comment today.
So additional seating is also available in overflow rooms 1103 and 1801.
and the usual policies of board members recusing before any discussion on the item if they need to recuse themselves.
So with that, we're now ready for item one where there is no motion and information item and Melanie will present for us and we have some guests.
Good morning, President Kerr, Superintendent Twerkson, and members of the board.
I'm Melanie Sheppy, the director of the Improvement and Accountability Division.
And in honor of National Teacher Appreciation Week, I'd like to thank my sixth grade teacher, Mr. Fleming, friends with him on Facebook, who sparked a deep curiosity in me for science and history.
Item one, as President Cruz said, is information only and it's intended to be an update on the system of support for local educational agencies and schools.
This item, of course, builds upon the updates that you have all had at previous board meetings and was prepared by several agencies in the system of support planning group.
First, we will highlight the progress of the system of support planning group.
Then we will have two county superintendents share their reflections on differentiated assistance and how they see their work moving forward.
Finally, we'll have the California Collaborative for Educational Excellence share lessons from their pilot partnerships.
As you might remember from previous items, the agencies charged with support and assistance under the local control funding formula began meeting regularly to calibrate and align their support.
Those meetings evolved to include stakeholders and practitioners from the field, which better informs the ongoing collaboration.
The agencies and stakeholders meet every other month with work in between to better align their work and respond to concerns and interests from the field.
I reminded you of this goal the last time we had a discussion on the system of support and I wanted to do it again because I think if we keep this goal in mind as we discuss our updates today and reflect on if the highlighted work is measuring up to this goal, it will help us continue to move our system forward.
So consider if the work focuses on building capacity so that communities can sustain improvement and does it effectively address inequities and student opportunities and outcomes because this really is the goal that we're putting forward for all levels of support.
In addition to the goal for support, we've also identified the shifts to improvement under the local control funding formula.
You've heard these shifts come through during previous updates on the system of support, and you'll hear them again today from county superintendents and the California Collaborative for Educational Excellence.
These shifts include support providers working alongside LEAs and their communities, a systematic approach to improvement that's tailored to locally identified needs, and engagement with local communities as a part of the decision-making process.
You've also heard these shifts come alive in how the California Department of Education Special Education Division is approaching monitoring and how we're working as a department to provide one coherent message to the field across state and federal programs.
In order to hold ourselves accountable to supporting these shifts, the System of Support Planning Group created a feedback loop to get feedback from the field on both the strengths and challenges within our new system.
We will discuss these findings with the System of Support Planning Group in June and hopefully then share highlights and next steps with you all in July.
I won't be here because I'll have a new baby, but I'm sure it will be a great discussion on highlights and next steps.
I will.
Thank you.
I will make sure that it's set up well.
We have a great staff here I can depend on.
So within this broad concept of support, there's three levels.
The first level, support for all, is provided by all agencies and organizations and accessible to all LEAs and schools across California.
However, as we know, for some districts, the support for all is not enough to move them closer to their student goals.
the local control funding formula defined what additional support can look like and how to access it.
As you know, level two or differentiated assistance is tailored for districts who have student groups who need support in two or more priority areas.
Within differentiated assistance, there's a clear focus on data analysis and understanding the underlining causes with additional support aligned to that analysis and reflection.
Beyond level two is level three, when districts have student groups who still need support in two or more priority areas for three out of four years.
Since today's discussion is rooted in support work that's occurring right now, I'll take a second to drill down a bit further into differentiated assistance.
Remember our key takeaways.
Districts are the drivers for assistance, and the LCAP captures improvement work with local data illuminating the need.
As I've mentioned, the system of support planning group is charged with coordinating and aligning support at all levels and responding to real-time concerns and interests from the field.
It includes state agencies, stakeholder groups, and practitioners.
The work from this group feeds into each state board system of support update item.
I think we've provided this example before, but this group very much reminds me of the group I pulled together to coordinate support for my Greenleaf scholars.
We call it the COS team, coordination of services team.
Every week we would sit down together, the reading intervention teacher, our community liaison, our attendance clerk, our staff that supported recess, and we talked about real kids and real problems.
And we talked about not only how is our level one support for our school meeting the needs of those students, but also what do they need above and beyond that, and how are we coordinating and making sure we're building off each other to get our students what they need.
Through this team, we held ourselves accountable to getting students the services they need, and I believe through the system of support planning group, we can hold each other accountable to making sure we're continuing to make our system of support better for districts and schools.
In addition to responding to real-time need and concerns from the field, the planning group has the following priorities.
First, mapping bright spots so that the field can learn from the successes and strengths across California.
Then aligning funding opportunities and planning level three support.
Also drilling down on creating resources to support improvement cycles and building county capacity and finally dissemination of information including support for all level one resources.
All members of the planning group will be part of this work with specific agencies taking the lead to ensure coordination and progress moving forward.
And of course, that work will also include stakeholder engagement beyond that system of support planning group, but really making sure that each agency is owning moving the work forward.
Now we'll transition to hearing from two county superintendents.
They will share their experiences so far and how they're preparing to move forward.
First we'll have Judy Flores from Shasta County and then we'll have Ted Alejandro from San Bernardino County.
Well, good morning, President Kirst, Superintendent Torlakson, members of the board.
I appreciate the opportunity to come and share with you the work that's going on in Shasta County.
And I'd like to frame my comments around four points.
Four main points.
One is the prevention work that we've been involved with, the level one.
Our differentiated assistance process, which will be the second.
And the feedback we've gotten from districts over the course of this first round, this first cycle.
And then four, I'll end with our next steps as we plan from here moving into the summer and next school year.
So first of all, our focus has been on prevention, not just this year, but I'll highlight some of the work that we've been doing in that area this year.
So one of our areas of focus has been a Gates Foundation grant that we received to help support the area of literacy.
And through that process, we had a couple of our employees who were trained by Carnegie as improvement science
specialists, although they don't like that term, specialists, they feel like they're still learning.
But one of those individuals was able to be part of the CCESA team that put together the trainings that were offered to county office staff over the course of this year.
And in the course of doing that and preparing for that, we decided to reach out and offer to schools and districts in our county the opportunity to come together as school and district leadership teams back in July of last year to look at an area of need that they had identified and begin to work in that area well ahead of any formal identification.
And we had 17 teams that were a part of that process.
And what came out of that was once the differentiated assistance districts were named, three of the districts had been involved in the process.
And two of them were our smaller districts, which meant they had an entire year to work on this as opposed to starting in December and trying to work more quickly.
For one of them, it was one of our, quote, larger districts in Shasta County, which is not all that large by state standards, just a district of about 3,000 students.
And what they had was a team from every school participate in this school leadership team process.
And so they had a much deeper awareness of what then they would be doing as a district in looking at challenges.
Another area of prevention has been around the college and career indicator.
Over the last two years, I've been working closely with each district that has high schools, as well as one of our charter high schools, to begin to understand what does that indicator look like, what are the sources of data that make up that indicator, and then why are we getting the results that we're getting?
as we think about the A to G rates in Shasta County, the CTE pathway completers, as well as the Smarter Balance levels three and four.
We have definitely room to grow, but as we began to dig into that, what we identified were some areas that we could really focus well ahead of it showing up on the dashboard, what we could focus on to truly make improvement in that area.
We've begun to see increases in that area, although not on the CCI specifically, but as we look at the A to G completion rates, we've seen that increase countywide over 14% in the two years we've been working on this as a focus.
The third area in terms of prevention I'll touch on is in terms of chronic absenteeism.
I have used the time since the data first came out to build awareness within our county of what that means in terms of the indicator, how we're tracking that, and then to make sure that
the understanding is built at a much deeper level than just with our districts.
I've been in conversations with our Chief of Probation, our District Attorney, the Health and Human Services Agency, and as we have begun to look into our data, the student population, the student group that's most at risk in that area is our Native American population.
significantly higher than any of the others in our county.
And so, I've been working with Native American education leaders in our county, supporting both ends of our county, to really begin to say, why?
What is the issue here?
And so, focus groups are being held, individual interviews with families are taking place, so that we begin to understand the why.
Because until we understand the why, we really can't address the problem.
So now let me move into the differentiated assistance process.
The process we went through, I met with each one of our district superintendents back in December, took someone from my staff along with me, and we set up a plan that we would meet monthly from December through April.
They all wanted to be done by the end of April so that they could build their LCAP and get the actions identified within their LCAP.
And so we met monthly with each of our districts.
We had six districts identified.
The largest one was 3,400 students.
The smallest was 500 students, and everything in between those two spans.
And where we started after the initial meeting with the superintendent was to take a deep dive into the data to say, what do we see with a larger team, of course, but what do we see when we look at the dashboard?
What does that mean?
When we look at the five by fives, when we then dig farther into data quest and smarter balance, what is it that we're really seeing?
And one of the things that I'll point out that we saw in the process of doing that, not only did we identify the strengths and areas of focus or areas of need identified within districts, but we also saw bright spots in every district where they had a grade span or a grade level that didn't have gaps.
And it gave hope to the district that we're already doing this.
And what can we learn from the areas where it's already successful?
We then moved into the use of the improvement science tools, helping the district to think why we're getting the results that we're getting, and seeking various stakeholder perspectives in the use of various tools, whether it was interviews, whether it was going back and asking school staff, but just to try and gain a much larger perspective in terms of what the problem really is.
From there, we moved into looking at the system, because we know there's many systems that are in play in a district, but taking a look at one of the systems in which the problem exists.
And when you take a look at those systems, using a tool like the LEA self-assessment or the SWIFT
fidelity, integrity assessment, to be able to say, what are some of those best practices?
Where are we?
And have the district reflect on some potential actions that would help move them forward as they think about next steps.
And so from there, each district identified what would be those high leverage actions, prioritized down to just a few, so that they actually were focused enough to truly implement those as we move into next year.
And those strategies right now are currently being written into LCAPS.
In our final meeting with each district in April, my last question to each team, and we met with all of them individually, was for feedback.
How did this process work for you?
What could we do to improve it the next time through?
And some of the things that we heard that they valued, they valued that it was customized to them.
It was customized in terms of allowing existing teams if they already had a team that was working on the issue to use that team.
We also customized the tools.
There were no two districts that used the same set of tools.
And then the times in which we met with them.
Some needed to meet after school because subs were an issue.
Some wanted to meet during the day and so we varied that as needed by the district.
Another piece that I heard that people valued was having a preset time to meet on a monthly basis really helped hold them accountable.
And that's what they found helpful.
They knew that before we met again, there was work to be done.
And knowing that the date had already been scheduled for that next meeting kept the process moving forward.
They really saw us as a supportive partner was another thing that I heard.
And one of our larger districts talked about the fact that they really appreciated our facilitation of the process because it allowed the district leaders to participate and listen and truly engage as opposed to trying to facilitate the meetings themselves.
One of our smaller districts made the comment that they really appreciated the fact that the actions were things that were doable from their standpoint.
They chose them all, but they really were able to get it down to things that would make a difference, and they owned the outcome.
So in terms of our next steps, we have developed a plan for LCAP, the level one, the level two support that will go to our board in June to meet what's identified in Ed Code 52066 in sharing that plan with the board.
And that plan has already been shared with all six of our districts who are in differentiated assistance.
And it outlines some very specific support that we are ready to provide to them.
Assuming, of course, the money all comes through with the governor's budget, we have a plan that they can, again, individualize to meet their needs.
But what we are at this point transitioning to do is to truly move them with support to action.
To say, what are your leading indicators?
Yes, we know those lagging, those show up on the dashboard.
But what would be some leading measures that would truly help you know if, would predict that the lagging measures will change?
And to be able to identify those leading measures when school starts or over the course of this summer so that when they start school, they can start tracking the progress so that come the next dashboard release, it's no surprise.
Another thing that we stand ready to support our districts in doing is to help them with the implementation of the actions that they've identified.
If it's helpful for us to come alongside, to walk with them as they are involved in that process of implementing, we're there to support.
We have also offered and have had several of our districts take us up on the offer to meet with larger school and district leadership teams in the summer to make sure that they are deeply informed of this process because it was a selection.
Our largest team had 18 who participated and to have more people truly understand at a deep level what was involved in that.
So we will be meeting with at least three of our districts who've confirmed dates already over the course of the summer.
And then once we hit the fall, we want to continue the process of meeting monthly with the superintendent and those on the team to help them look at those leading measures, look at the growth that they're making, and then make revisions and course changes if they're not seeing the results that they would hope to have seen.
In terms of prevention, our next steps, the school leadership team model that we started last July was so successful.
Today, they're actually having day five, their final day for the year, and we've already been asked to repeat that so that the same teams can send new people from their schools to learn more.
We've been asked to do a year two, and we've also been asked to start over for brand new teams.
So we're in the process of putting that together.
Another next step that's really not just next, it's been continuing, is the collaboration with Region 2.
So we have nine county offices within Region 2, and we are a very collaborative group.
The superintendents meet on a monthly basis, the assistant superintendents meet regularly,
And we're sharing the learnings that are taking place through this process.
We share resources.
We also share the approaches that have been successful and maybe ones that haven't been as successful so we can learn from each other.
We also look to see where assistance might be needed in another county so that we can support those.
Within this first round of differentiated assistance, there were four of the nine counties that did not have any districts in differentiated assistance.
And so they're really wanting to learn alongside those of us who've been involved in the process.
So my key takeaways from all of this, this work has really allowed districts to focus.
It hasn't asked them to look at all eight state priorities and all the metrics.
They've been allowed to focus and that focus has been absolutely critical.
Secondly, they have engaged various stakeholders in different parts of the process.
Not all were full members of the team, but where they needed perspective, they went out and sought it.
If they needed to hear from parents, if they needed to hear from special ed staff who work with special ed students who are being suspended, that's the group they reached out to.
And so it was really stakeholder engagement
very practical level that influenced the direction of where they headed and and finally This is called differentiated assistance But it truly was differentiated in Shasta County for each one.
It was absolutely unique.
So, thank you
Good morning, Mr. President, members of the State Board, Superintendent Torlakson.
It's great to be here and it's an honor to be here to share with you what's happening in San Bernardino County, especially in this time that's so exciting and historic in education.
But I'm from San Bernardino County.
We have 33 school districts and we serve a little over 400,000 students.
And really have to go back a couple of years ago when local control first started, because that really gave the districts a local discretion to address their top priorities.
And in 33 districts where we have a real mix in terms of geography and size, what is a priority in Needles may be different than Fontana or Colton, Redlands, Big Bear, and others.
But we do share some common themes, and districts have been able to leverage the dollars to support those higher needs.
And it's really come at a time where our county of San Bernardino engaged on a county-wide vision.
to make San Bernardino County the best place to work, live, and play.
And one of the key elements that they looked towards was the education element that's led by Dr. Morales from Cal State and myself, where we followed.
And what districts have adopted is our cradle-to-cure roadmap that really looks at the key indicators for success for all students from 0 to 5, K-12, and post-secondary, not just from an academic perspective, but also from a social-emotional perspective.
So as we start to build this accountability system, it's really tied into the efforts we've had over the last couple of days.
We've become alignment USA community and through the efforts of our partners in the county and our San Bernardino County Workforce Development, Cal State and the business sector.
We were able to focus on college and career readiness and link learning pathways across our high schools to really make academics relevant to students by incorporating and accelerating pathways across our county.
And so as we come into the dashboard that was released in December, we were ready to work with our districts to get more focused on how we're going to address the areas that they needed support in.
We have 16 districts that are eligible for differentiated assistance.
And as we started the meetings with them, we really looked at
How can we address your issues and how can we be of support so you can be successful?
The districts do have, and we've noticed that they're eligible because of students with disability, homeless and foster youth are ones that are in place in many of the districts.
And two areas that we really needed to work with is supporting English learners and also reducing suspensions.
And so when we met with our districts the first time, it really was a collaborative effort to talk about continuous improvement.
And it's really shifting from compliance to capacity building.
And one of the things that we noticed and we were pleased with, we really promoted and supported a climate of candor.
and urgency towards dealing with these issues.
And districts are excited to move forward to address them because they're focused on the dashboard and how they place within that dashboard.
We met three times.
The second meeting, we went into a deep dive in the data, really looked at root cause analysis and used, as Judy mentioned, the LAA self-assessment as a tool to work through that process.
And then when we met with the third time with the districts, we really had a summary and analysis of what we can do to support the districts and what the next steps could be.
as they move forward in their individual districts to address the areas that they were read in.
And so, as we move forward, our focus is on how can we continue this process and really leveraging services in a collective impact model.
And that seems to be desired and wished for by all the stakeholders in our county.
In our county office, we approached it in a way that every district has individual needs and they want to address their priorities that are most important to them.
So we have a menu of services.
It really ties towards the academics.
It ties towards science.
It ties towards math.
It ties towards social-emotional learning.
As I mentioned before that while there's unique priorities in every one of our districts, there's five common themes that have emerged in every single one of our districts.
And our county office has really become more intimately aware of what those priorities are because we go through the approval process for every district's LCAP.
And what we're seeing is that every district is really trying to engage students in the learning process.
And the way to do that effectively is to provide professional development to all their certificated staff and paraprofessionals.
And so we're deeply engaged in that work and really working with expertise within the county office, but not just the county office, looking at where we could broker that expertise to where it lies.
And sometimes that's from the higher ed and the university.
Sometimes that's for other agencies.
Sometimes that's for the California Department of Education and others that are willing to work with us to support our school districts.
So when you look at another area, it's on accelerating the use of technology.
Districts have really gone away from acquisition of hardware and software to really implementing and utilizing technology to accelerate learning and to engage students in the process.
And then two other key areas.
One involves social emotional needs of students.
You know, when you look at one of the greatest services that we provide our districts, it's within PBIS.
The number of schools went from seven to over 300 this year.
Seven started about seven years ago because districts see the need for students.
We have over 70% that are from families that are from low income families.
And so those students need a lot more wraparound services and support.
to address their needs.
And that's done through PBIS and other models that we have.
The other thing that we're seeing is in college and career readiness.
I mentioned linked learning pathways.
But really, the mindset from our district has gone from, we need to increase graduation rates, which we've done.
But the other thing is, what's the plan the day after graduation?
And that's what districts are working so hard with their teams on in supporting students to have that plan.
One of the elements that our districts want to do is they want to learn from each other.
And so at every one of our superintendents' meetings, we share best practices along the priority areas that districts have in their plans.
In fact, at our last meeting, we worked with Dr. Judy White, who's the superintendent of Riverside County, and we brought the superintendents together from both counties, and each county shared a best practice in a common area that districts had needs for.
And so we want to continue that collaboration because when you look at Riverside and San Miguel County, we have nearly a million students.
And so we know that there's a lot of services that we can leverage and resources that we can leverage to support our students.
And so that work is taken a priority.
One of the key things, as you know, that districts are required to have in their LCAPs is parent and stakeholder engagement.
We saw that as a need early on and districts asked us, how can we support them in building their stakeholder engagement plans?
And so we brought on two individuals that are working with our districts in building and promoting best practices to engage parents and other stakeholders in the process.
And that's been one of the areas that we've seen strong growth in.
And we can't forget in the stakeholder engagement process that youth voice is important.
So in our county, we work with our districts and invited students from every one of our districts to come together to be part of a countywide student advisory group.
This is the third year we've done it.
This is the highest we've had so far with about 250 students participating from across our high schools.
And they're addressing the needs that we have in our countywide vision.
which include education, health, safety, and jobs for the future.
And so the students go through a process and series of meetings together where they do some team building to get to know each other, but then they really go back to their schools and survey and talk to others to come up with solutions based on those four areas.
And at the end of the process, they present them to elected leaders, school board members, county elected, federal elected, state elected.
and also business leaders so that the adults understand what students want and how we can support that as they build that process.
And that's been a very popular resource for all of our districts.
And early literacy.
In our countywide vision, third grade reading objective is a huge priority in the county adopted and invited superintendent down to meet with the county board of supervisors.
But their first vision was vision to read.
And so we all talked about how we can support literacy across our county.
And so we've made available to every family in our county a literacy platform that really builds vocabulary and other key reading skills.
And that's been very supportive.
And throughout the process, we've had a close relationship with CCEE.
They've been very helpful in building support.
We have one of our districts in the pilot.
But in building our networks and the way we're addressing these needs with our districts, they've been a very helpful resource.
So it's working together collectively in a collaborative model.
And I'll just end with a couple of things.
As we started this process with working with districts, we knew that as we approved the LCAP, we didn't want it to be compliance based.
So we developed an LCAP team.
There's three key members with great experience behind them.
Each are assigned 11 districts.
So they build the relationships and the trust of working with those districts.
So that as we go through that process, it's working as a team in a collaborative manner.
And districts have really appreciated that because they've been able to reach out to those individuals to help them address the areas that they have.
And that's been wonderful.
And then when you look at our business community, people understanding the model we have now for accountability, and one of the slides that I show them, and some of you around in the 90s when we had Public School Accountability Act come out, but one of the slides I show is the dashboard.
So you see the colors across the top, you see the state indicators, and then with each of the blocks are the number of districts in terms of how they met that indicator.
And when you look at our county with 33 districts, they're right in the middle.
And so when you remember the API, when it was introduced, most districts were right in the middle.
Some that needed help, others that were farther along, but everybody made progress.
And the mindset and the excitement, and this is why I'm excited to do this work, is that all of our districts really are focused on how they want to move their districts to those
green and blue colors in each of the indicators.
So it's an exciting time.
We've had some early success and we feel comfortable moving forward.
We're excited that there's funding in the governor's proposal so that we can move forward with supporting districts.
But this gives you kind of a broad outline of how we're addressing it in San Mario County.
So thank you.
For the last part of our discussion, we have the California Collaborative for Educational Excellence sharing their learnings from their pilot partnerships.
Well, good morning, President Kurz.
Good morning, Superintendent Torlakson and board.
It's great to see everyone.
I love the smiling faces.
It's great.
It kind of feels kind of awkward being on this side, but very exciting.
Very exciting.
We're here today really to talk about our experience and how we have provided support to our partnerships.
And we have some learnings, early learnings we'd like to share.
But before I begin, I want to tell you my story.
And my story is that I left the board a little over two years ago, or about two years ago, to really join the CCEE.
And I left it because I wanted to be part of an organization that was going to begin to do the work differently.
I remember sitting right over there, right next to Tom.
And I would always have this nudge in my stomach and pain in my stomach about this idea that when we were developing our system of accountability, that it could potentially revert back to the way we did things.
And we were all very clear when we were sitting on the board that we never wanted to see that happen again.
As a result of that, I joined CCEE and began with our team that work.
And we've been very fortunate to be able to do that work, although very difficult because of the travel.
It has been very rewarding working with all of our districts, and they have been an amazing partnership.
So I wanted to share that.
What we're going to talk about today really is about who our partners are, the way we are doing this work, and more importantly, what are the lessons learned, because we have
been charged with coming back to you and sharing with you how is this work going to inform how we're going to support our statewide system of support.
So in the first slide, you'll notice that we have on the left-hand side, those are our eight partnerships.
Those are the partnerships that initially came to us.
We took them to our board, and we became very excited about this work.
They wanted to be in front of the work rather than behind the work.
You'll note that there is an asterisk in four of our partnerships and that indicates this four of those are in direct assistance services.
And we are, as Ted Alejandro mentioned, we are in support with our county offices doing this work together.
On the right hand side are the partners who called, knocked on the door and said, we want to be learning partners.
We know that we won't receive finances, but we do want to be part of the learning.
Can we be part of your summit learning?
And so we've begun the work.
They have all been incredible and each bring a very unique work to the table and learning.
Our theory of action is, you've seen this theory of action before, and basically it says that we believe that if you engage with CCEE, our whole sole purpose is to build capacity.
And the way we're doing this is by providing the resources, the information, and the processes in which to do this work.
And we believe that by doing this and building your capacity, that you will be better decision makers as you move forward.
We specifically focus on three big ideas, the California way, engagement,
equity issues, and how do we know that this work is working and what evidence do we bring forward to the table.
So we have four building blocks that we work with our teams.
One is the collaboration, this important opportunity when they come to our network summits that they have time to talk about the issues, learn together,
And what we've noticed is that they value team time more than anything else because this is something that they're not able to do when they're back.
Remember, we're building these teams in order for them to go back to their districts and do the building back with their cabinets and with their districts.
So that is a really important part of our work.
As we continue to build capacity, it's about problem-solving.
How do we problem-solve together as a team?
How do we go back and problem-solve together as a district?
Engagement, we all know, we've been hearing the conversations from the county offices, and we all agree that that is a really critical component, and we understand that that has taken time.
The difference between
communicating to engage folks in the work, in the process, and or communicating to inform.
And so that's a great learning for our teams as well.
And of course, how do we know this is working?
What is the evidence that CCE is collecting to determine that we are truly building capacity with our teams?
What impact do we have?
So we've created surveys that we collect.
We collect feedback.
We did some early exit interviews with the researcher, and now we're in the process of continuing to do that work.
So how do we do this work?
We created a basic curriculum for how we were gonna do the work.
Last year when we started, we started with the relationship between the superintendent and the county superintendents and we brought them together.
And as we worked to build their capacity, we quickly learned that we had a void.
And the void was that we didn't have the rest of the voices in the room.
And those voices are the voice of the teacher, the voice of someone in curriculum and instruction, the voice of the principals.
And that shift that we made was monumental.
Although difficult for our teams, when our teams came together and we brought the teachers to the room,
It created a little bit of angst because superintendents, we could tell that we were beginning to build, we were asking information that perhaps wasn't that superintendents and their cabinets didn't want to learn and share, is that it was taking them time.
So we spent some time this year bringing teams together, very powerful, teacher leader, superintendent, cabinet member, and a principal.
And in October, we asked them to identify a model of continuous improvement that they were going to use in order to evaluate the work that we were doing.
They were also asked to pick a specific focus.
You heard from Judy just recently that this idea of being very focused, you can't do all eight state priorities.
I know that's difficult.
I know when I sat there, it was difficult for us to do as well.
But the concept here is about,
having them learn how to do this work, and then applying those concepts across every single department in order to move the organization.
In January, we revisit those two pieces, but we really talked about what are the actions that you're going to do in order to get you to your focus, to ensure that what you selected is actually going to prove outcomes for students.
In April, we had a very heavy discussion about what's the evidence that you're going to be collecting?
How will you know that the work that you're doing is giving you the intended outcomes that you had wished for?
What impact is it making?
We're leaving today, and tomorrow we'll be meeting with our teams, and we are going to talk about how we're going to study this work, because it really is about a reflective process.
This work is about an iterative cycle, about planning, and doing, and acting, and studying, and doing it again.
And we're very excited about that.
And then in July, we will bring them back.
We will reflect on the work that we did for the year, and continue to implement that work.
So how do we measure our impact?
How do we know that we are building capacity?
And how are the practices changing in districts and how do we know that?
And so this is the work that we're beginning.
We're going to be talking about ensuring that how do you take a team in a district,
that comes to five times a year to meet with us, follow it up with the lead, Socorro and I are leads and we follow up with each of our districts to continue to implement the work.
How do we know that they take it back and it spreads across?
And so this is the work that we're currently studying and we have some early findings.
So early in the fall of 2017, we did some exit interviews because we lost a couple of our partners.
And it was very critical for us to capture their story.
What worked for them in the partnership involved with CCE?
And where were there opportunities for us to grow?
We learned very quickly what came out loud and clear was that relationships were absolutely critical.
We literally took the time to build relationships not only with superintendent and cabinet, but also with the teams, the principals, the teachers.
We knew that we couldn't do this work without listening to their voices.
What were their concerns?
What were things that were working well?
And gathering all that information was very, very powerful and impactful for our teams.
We learned that that created trust among the superintendent in order for them also to feel safe in a place that they could really be truthful and not be worried that they were going to be judged in terms of how they were moving their district.
And we became their thought partners.
We were there not to tell them what to do or how to do it, but to work with them.
And that was a huge shift for them because they were waiting for us to tell them what to do.
And we learned that this process, they felt that what they were most excited is that it wasn't one size fits all.
And again, Judy reiterated the importance of that work, that they're learning as well, is that you can't do this work with a template and walk in and say in a checkbox.
It really is, again, listening to our superintendents and their teams and then working from there.
And we also learned that this process is organic, that there is no one way to do this work.
What are the areas of opportunities for growth for CCE?
It became really clear for us is that we have to be cognizant that no one district is the same, and that local politics do get involved in the process.
I was last night in one of our partnerships, and we've been building capacity of our board members, and that work has been slow.
but steady, and we're starting to see a change in the way the boards begin to behave around the work that we are doing.
A learning for us that our superintendent shared with us was that this organic process was a paradigm shift for them.
That they really did want us to say, they really did think we were going to come in and say, this is how you're going to do the work.
And although they appreciated it, it was difficult to work around that.
And as a result of that, we changed some of the work that we've been doing.
And now we are, as I mentioned earlier, we're evaluating our work.
We evaluated in our
Theory of action, are we truly building capacity for our teams?
Are they becoming stronger at making conversations around equity?
Are they getting better and engaging, and how do we know?
And so these two last surveys that we provided has indicated that we're moving in the right direction.
And I'm going to move it now to Socorro.
So to further deepen what we're doing, we also are bringing on more research partners and really thinking about how do we make sure we capture and put in writing these key learnings?
How do we both spotlight acceleration and success and also look across all the districts at trends that are happening, not as individual districts, but in this system of support and providing
support in this way.
And then, of course, bringing it back here to this group and other groups about how this new information might either further validate, like we've heard today, you'll hear similar stories about what we've learned that really sounds along the same lines as our county office partners.
But what does that tell us about the decisions we make next?
How do we stay well informed?
And so we brought these ideas forward last time about what has been working and we've even deepened our learning.
So we knew that it was about meaning making and as Aida mentioned, at first it was just superintendent to superintendent.
What we've seen is tremendous acceleration and deepening of conversations when we brought teachers and principals into the room.
Whereas sometimes, perhaps as superintendent to superintendent, and as a former superintendent, I say this with glee, we might stray from the classroom.
When teachers and principals are in the room, there is no straying from what happens to students every day in the classroom.
And while the whole system is important, keeping our eye on that prize is important.
And with teachers and principals in the room, that will always be true.
And that leads us into our second point as well, that while we talk about the grand scheme of things and the politics and all of those things, ultimately all of those issues and all of those problems we solve are in service to increase student learning.
And then you've heard this very much from all of our partners as we talk about this work, that when we think about these deep problems, and they really are wrestling, you do see lights go on and actually excitement begin to build as they think about the root cause and how they can really make a difference there.
and see the ripple effect, but it is a trade-off to involve many stakeholders in thinking about decision-making every step of the way.
And one of them is time, because you're having all these thoughtful conversations, again, not merely to inform, but to agree, to build relationship, to build consensus.
So what we've learned, to reiterate again what we heard from our county office partners, this idea of engagement at every step of the way, not only in sharing decisions that have been made, but forming the questions to ask from the beginning, changes the ownership, changes the depth of conversation, changes the momentum going into the heavy lift of doing things differently.
This idea of continuous improvement, while we take one example, one little case study in a district, it really is a framework that can apply to all the decisions we make in the system about how we engage people, about how we're looking for evidence, about how we're talking to people about their experience.
So as we frame the problem,
We really have everybody's perspective.
I don't know how many of you have seen that little graphic of the elephant where everybody has that fable where everybody sees a different part of the elephant.
We go back to that time and time again and how important it is to have everybody's voice so we really can see exactly what's going on.
You've heard again, this is reiterating and validating this idea about focus.
And it kind of intertwines with that local politics.
Everybody has something that's very important to them.
And so when we focus, sometimes it's not what's important to other people in the room.
And the idea of how we help communicate that focus doesn't mean stop, but it does mean deliberate learning and attention to this, whatever this is that they decide, so that those muscles can transfer to other issues as we attack them.
This idea of local politics being unpredictable.
Leadership matters, and we'll come to that, of course, at the end.
But stability and sustaining momentum.
Sometimes local politics, and they are what they are, and they do what they do, and it is the world we live in.
But they do make the work even harder, and we have to remember we are removed from that, and our colleagues are not.
So we do have to, as we think about pacing, as we think about pushing, it really is a delicate dance so that everything moves forward in a very positive fashion.
And that leadership, and we've seen it by districts who have had superintendent changes, of course, people move, they retire, life happens, that's how it goes.
But for things to be sustainable, there needs to be some level of consistency.
And again, by having this deeper wedge across the district, it definitely helps because it's not one person's idea or vision, it's shared and it's collective.
So that really has helped influence our work.
So we are, through the help of our agencies, gathering.
How this experience feels, not only to us, but you've heard the county offices and what it feels like as this becomes differentiated assistance.
As you remember, our districts were volunteer districts when they enter.
Now people won't necessarily be volunteering.
How does that dynamic change these conversations?
How do we continue to lift up and celebrate the work of districts?
while at the same time providing them support?
And then, of course, how do we make sure that all of this is aligned through all of our agencies?
Melanie, I don't know if you have... So, board members, if you want to open it up for questions... Yes, I think that's time for board... Good.
Board member questions.
Okay.
Board member Burr, then Rucker.
Well, I have a couple of questions, but mostly I just want to say yahoo.
Thank you so much for being here.
This is the work that Superintendent Torlakson and I get to hear about every time we meet with the collaborative and you see the terrific staff that we have that's been working on this.
So I think it's a couple things really impressive, the sort of depth of learning that you already have acquired, but want to talk a little bit about going forward because that we used to call these pilot districts and they evolved into partner districts.
But the fact of the matter is that at least the way the governor's budget is structured, we won't have funding to work this deeply at the collaborative level with individual districts.
So it's very important to capture these learnings and to be able to spread them to our other partners, certainly to the county offices, but also to all the LEAs about what they've learned.
One question I had was whether or not, and this actually came up in one of our letters from one of our stakeholders, it would make sense to include and be explicit about board members at the local level, because this is a theme that comes up a couple times about the local politics, which is code for local school board members.
So, I wonder about that, whether you've tried to do that, or whether that would be some recommendation that you would make going forward.
I think that certainly has been part of our work, and I know that we're working with other agencies to think about how we collectively address that.
I would also say that local politics includes board, but it's not just boards, right?
They're just, even just the demands of
special groups in the community.
It in no means is just board members, but certainly as we think about continuous improvement and we think about this level of engagement, it is a shift and everybody does deserve to be invested in to build their capacity to do this well.
So I do think we do have to imagine what it would look like to best support board members in their very challenging roles of making sense of all this
to their larger community.
My second question is actually to Judy and Ted.
And maybe mostly to Judy, but I know Ted just because I've known Judy for a long time.
And Judy, as you probably can tell, is one of the strongest curriculum and instruction leaders at the county level and has been for many, many years in Shasta County.
So I'm just curious to have you sort of contrast what we used to do, meaning SAIT and DATE, where we had this very specific little recipe book, do this, do this, do this.
I heard it a lot in your comments, but just to be a little bit more explicit about it, and what you see as the pros and cons of the change that we've made.
Wow, that's a loaded question.
Well, it's actually how we started the conversation with each one of our district teams.
One of the things was to share that this was really about looking at student groups, whereas before it was about looking at the whole.
Also, the focus was on growth.
Before, you didn't really get credit for growth until you hit a certain line.
And so now, any measure of improvement
is significant and will change color, change outcomes for kids.
And so it really is about improvement.
And so that was a critical piece.
And that there wasn't one right way to do this.
There were lots of options, lots of ways that they could choose to focus.
And it was very freeing for the districts to say, yes, we were identified, five of our six were identified for students with disabilities.
But for some of them, they realized that it was a system-wide issue.
It wasn't specific to students with disability.
And then they had that freedom to be able to address the larger issue if it truly was, or to stay focused if that really was the challenge.
And so all of those, I think, are different ways, ways this differs in process.
Funding is also very different in the previous process.
But it really does put the ownership on the district to say, well, how can we support this within the resources that we have?
How do we need to think differently?
How do we need to work differently?
We came with lots of questions to ask them to think about.
We didn't come with a recipe to follow or a set of, although we had tools, they didn't have to use all the tools.
We could fine-tune them down to what really would help them move forward the area they were focused on.
Ted, maybe you could, because Judy talked about their region, and your region is so different.
It's helpful to, I think, also understand in this context of how different the state is in terms of population and organization and all of that, and why individual support is so important.
You know, absolutely.
And again, going from a compliance-based model to a cooperative and collaborative-based model has been key for us.
It's even involved, you know, Jeannie mentioned the fiscal piece of it.
We have our fiscal advisors that do the AB 1200 work and working closely with our LCAP advisors.
So they can really strategize together and work with districts on how they can best utilize their resources to address their top priorities.
And that's been very helpful.
And early on when, you know, CCE started to develop its programs and its policies and procedures,
They came out, Carl, as he came out to speak to our superintendents, and they were really pleased about having a model from the state that really looked at building collaboration.
You know, Dr. Strauss has been out to our superintendents' meetings, too, and has strengthened that message.
And so, they're in a mode right now where they feel like there's support and they have availability to take some risks in moving forward.
But the other key piece is that they're not addressing accountability from two academic areas primarily.
It's from the indicators in the state where they have to look at suspensions.
They have to look at attendance.
They have to look at English learners in college and career readiness.
And so for us as a county office, it's really caused us to go away from a silo-based service agency to one that really looks at all the resources that we have and how we can integrate and leverage those resources to really address the top priorities of districts.
Again, going back to where that expertise many times may not lie within the staff at the county office, it's going to be with outside agencies, with higher ed, with CDE, and other individuals that bring together that resource.
For example, suspensions.
We have our CWA teams, which we never accessed in the past.
Now they're becoming integral in helping to work with our districts and our staff so we can understand the needs of our students and how we can apply and leverage those services to address the needs.
And so it's exciting moving forward because everybody's coming together.
And again, it was perfect timing for us in our county because our county leadership under our Board of Supervisors and our CEO had the countywide vision.
So, it really allowed us to work and leverage the resources of the county government to support the needs we have in education.
So, that's been exciting.
Okay, Board Member Rocker is next.
Well, I also want to add my appreciation for all four of you making the trip here today.
I have known Socorro and Aida for a very long time, and I'm very proud of the work that they have taken on the mantle of responsibility and leadership to implement.
And so I want to start just by asking a couple of questions to Ted and Judy.
And we've never met before, but I'm choosing to be informal and address you by your first name, so I'm sorry.
There is an assumption because you're at the county office about the capacity of your staff and your offices to do this work, knowing that we are making a significant shift
in what accountability looks like and what the system of support looks like.
And board member Burr in asking you to talk about the differences between SAIT and DATE and what you're doing now to talk about those differences really gets at my question about your capacity.
I appreciated your candor.
I have enjoyed when other county officers have come and talked about their programs and
You know, we're all walking down the primrose path and doing so well and having such great success with the work that we're doing.
But the reality is, I've always asked to please talk to us about what the challenges are.
What are the capacity issues as you go forward in this program and the system itself begins to blossom?
and you have different types of intervention needs becoming apparent.
So I appreciate that that's what you talked about today.
So my question to you at your office, at your level, in the part of the system where you are working, what do you see as the likely capacity issues that you're confronting now?
And what is your short-term and long-term plan
for trying to address that so that capacity for you at the level you operate at doesn't become an obstacle for building out this work.
So probably our largest challenge this year was to take this on without additional funding.
I took on the lead role for this for four of our six districts, although I was involved in the first and last meeting for the other two.
And when you think about, we have 25 districts in Shasta County.
only 26, 27,000 students but 25 different districts for which we might need to go down this path.
And so our reality is just the staff to take this on if we had many more than say six or seven involved in the process at any one time.
So what it would involve is just adding to bringing and we're doing this
even in preparation for next year, bringing on someone who will oversee the process.
I don't need to oversee the process to make sure all the meetings get scheduled and, you know, some of those levels of communication.
But how do we bring people on and have them shadow and really learn what's been successful and at various levels of support?
when you think about moving from the identification of the actions you're going to work on and those lead measures that you want to measure to see if the changes you've made are going to lead to improvement, then you've got to have staff to help with that work or offer the staff.
And so how do we continue to bring on people?
So one of the, let me, let me,
So when Tom Armolino started down the path of building up what is currently the Shasta County Office of Education, we did a fee-for-service kind of model for our districts to say, we know you're all too small to have your own math coach and to have your own of all of these different
resources, science, etc.
But if we bring them on board to the county office, you could buy a day or 10 days of their time to assist you in that work.
So that's kind of the model that's been built over time.
And so what the differentiated assistance allows us to do is for those districts who've been identified is to have a certain number of those days we would not charge them for.
And so the capacity's already been built at larger than what would be needed for differentiated assistance because of the way it's been built over time.
But with that said, depending on the number of districts, it may mean that we need to add a few more resources.
The other thing that we have done, and I'll speak to it from the preventative side, there are
it's all about building the capacity within districts so that they can take on this work and do it on their own.
So when I talked about the school leadership teams, we don't meet with those individually.
They all come together in one place at one time.
We've got 120 people, you know, maxing our largest room.
And so what that does is it gives them the experience, but they own the whole process.
And so, there are some of those economies of scale that come into play that help everyone improve, but not at the same level of support.
Does that help?
That helps, yes.
And I'll just add that one of the things I mentioned was collective impact.
And within our county, it really brought together those resources to support common values and needs that we have and goals.
And, you know, one example I mentioned was PBIS.
Well, we started that work and districts were really accelerating that in their districts and really bringing down suspensions and expulsions.
But we wanted to build that to higher capacity.
And so Department of Behavioral Health started to fund half the cost of each person we brought on to do that work because they had similar goals and objectives.
And so when you find those partners in terms of leveraging, that can really build the capacity.
And I didn't mention networks.
earlier, but in our county, tapping into leadership in various school districts, we've had people take ownership and lead networks that's come and we've been able to centralize on the county office.
But for CTE, for coaches, counselors, science, language, ed tech, prevention, intervention, media, library, math, history, and many more, these networks have helped with job likes.
and bringing expertise and best practices because the kind of a area of focus we have in the county is let's identify the best practices within our county and now working with Riverside, both counties, and then replicating that so we can see that same success across many different districts.
So the partnerships have been valuable, but I see the only way to move forward is to really have strong collective impact where we can all work together and collaborate so that the resources are used in the best ways possible.
Okay, thank you very much.
I wanted to, the reason why I wanted to ask Ted and Judy that question first, I was, and I was hoping you would identify some unique activities that you were doing or actually work that you're doing that's unique to the context of your county and your local context is, that's why I wanted to pivot and turn to Sakhara and Aida and ask, when you now start working with LEAs and in some counties,
In what way is the collaborative awareness of those types of unique programs or unique capacities that the county offices are creating?
Are there, in what ways is the collaborative either aware of it or able to take advantage and in some way fit into or make connections with that work as you as you start going in and partnering with schools?
One of the things that we did early on in the summits, as Ted alluded to, is the partner counties of every district also attend the second day.
So, they're able to, in real time, talk about and explain all the resources they have at the county.
So, they're very aware of the depth of conversations that are happening in the district.
And then they can either share what they have or take it back and think about how do we build on this need that's been identified.
And so by having them in the room, we actually don't have to speak for them.
We let them share what they have and what they're capable of doing.
And it also then can go back and help them as they're planning ahead for the future.
We know we have this.
How many more look like this or sound like this?
And so it's been very helpful that way.
to make sure, again, we see a great power of literally everybody being in the room together.
So we're all hearing the same things, chewing on the same information, and asking deeper questions so we understand the same things as we leave.
Okay, thank you so much.
And that was my last question.
I also want to thank Melanie for putting this panel together.
And Melanie, I also want to thank you for opening the presentation by giving acknowledgement that this was Teacher Appreciation Week.
So I will close
by also acknowledging Teacher Appreciation Week.
I'm a proud graduate of the former Grant Unified School District.
I'm a composite of every single teacher who ever had the pleasure of having me in their classroom as a student.
And I want to make sure I honor their work and their contributions and the hard work that they're doing now as part of the Twin Rivers Unified School District.
And they were the reason why when I became a teacher, I chose to go back in that community and begin my career teaching in that community.
So thank you very much.
Well, I just want to thank Socorro and Aida and Ted and Judy also for coming today.
And I think kind of illustrating the collaborative effort it's taking of the agencies working together rather than and kind of challenging the problem of silos and also the cross agency group that's really working together with a lot of our stakeholders to develop this.
So, I have a couple of things.
First, I think there's some really good lessons that you're helping to inform practice on.
The ones that you shared with the collaborative with the pilot partner, the partner pilot districts, and then also with the county work and helping to learn that no approach is, it's a unique approach and it's personalized.
And I think that's as district people, I think, and site people appreciate that, that there's not a,
we're not putting a template on top of you and telling you what we're actually working with you and understanding the context and I think those of us who work in school districts know that their local politics and local dynamics totally affect kind of how things work and that it's personalized around that and I think you've learned those lessons so it's helpful to just keep that and help us be aware of that.
I do have some questions about people could volunteer to be a pilot or partner district and now
that phase will be going to the next phase.
And so I would look forward to maybe in July.
So what's going to happen now?
Can a district, let's say in San Bernardino, say, well, could we work with the collaborative instead?
How do they get to, you don't have to answer me now, but these are questions that I know people are saying.
What if I want to work?
What if I don't want to work in my county?
I'm a really small district and I'd like the collaborative to come work with me.
Will there be resources and can people access that?
And can you take everybody that wants to work with you?
I appreciate what San Bernardino and Riverside, both of them I've been out to and there's great energy and diversity.
And I just so appreciate both county supes talking about
A district could be a couple hundred and it could be a couple thousand.
It could be a couple hundred thousand.
And what a difference in scale and capacity and resources within that and how important it is to be able to differentiate.
And so, I mean, that is our challenge of our state of California.
And as we continue to roll this out, I think you help inform us with the lessons you're learning.
But I think I'm also looking and I know as I hear from districts, OK, so what happens next?
They've been practicing with us.
They've been working.
So in Shasta, we know our six or seven districts, but what about in Los Angeles?
It has more than 80 districts that work together.
Can the collaborative help more there because they have 25% of the students in the state of California?
So I just would say as the cross-agency group meets, and I know they'll be meeting in June again,
that maybe in July you could help us understand, so what the next steps are for people who want services, who want, do they get a choice?
Can they access that?
And so these are, I'm sure these are questions that you think about as well.
I just want to thank you again for sharing both the proactive work at the data analysis and looking deeper, and then also the preventative work that Judy talked about, like that's a really important thought.
And then the common things that I think we're hearing about early literacy and English learners and mobility issues and the transition in leadership, because superintendent site principles change, district leadership changes.
And in many cases, you've had to start, I believe, again, in building that capacity.
So I think we're all learning from that as well.
So again, thank you so much for helping to deepen our broader understanding of the challenges for personalizing the work.
And I just would hope that maybe in July, I know Melanie will be
not having much sleep by July, but we would really like to hear, I would say, the next steps for districts wanting to access different types of support based on the new data coming out.
Thank you very much.
Okay, Board Member Sandoval.
I just have a couple of questions.
First one is I learned from member Burr at our last meeting that the collaborative was hiring Dr. Estrada.
So if you could speak a little bit about the expertise that you're building within the collaborative and special education and how that might serve our partners throughout the state.
Yes, we are so fortunate that she's been able to join the CCE team.
I think member Burr shared that the CCE board of which Tom and Sue
represent everyone's interests, had asked that we really begin to take on special education and really think about how will we as a state, and again collectively, but very specifically with NCC address this need.
And so actually there was a discussion about kind of where some money might be and how we actually might be able to invest in this.
And one of the decisions
Early on was the collective, which again brings voices across the state together to address this.
CDE is deeply involved in this with Kristen and others, kind of really talking about what are the deeper issues that have surfaced from looking at the dashboard information.
And Dr. Estrada was brought on very specifically with her deep level of expertise.
Both in LA unified also in Boston and her broad base to really think about how are we going to as a system collectively really address this incredibly important topic.
And so she just began this week getting a feel for everything that's going on.
not only across the state, of course, but within the organization itself.
And so we really look forward and perhaps she can come forward with us in the future and share kind of what she sees both as what's been happening, her understanding to date, and then her hopes and aspirations for the future.
Thank you.
That would be wonderful.
And I know that the Advisory Commission on Special Education would also appreciate more on that, too.
I'm sure she'll be greatly integrated into all of those conversations.
Thank you.
And then my my second comment is for the superintendent of Shasta County.
I appreciate you sharing the challenges as well as the successes and your honesty.
And you had mentioned the disproportionate rate of Native Americans and the chronic absenteeism and what you're doing to get at the root causes.
And it really speaks to the importance of getting to know your local community because we have such a diverse state, our populations.
And so I direct education for a federally recognized tribe in Santa Barbara County.
And these are not new issues, but they do look different.
The root causes are different.
So I appreciated hearing about root causes, about building relationships.
engaging community partners because the challenges that really are at the heart of these, of the chronic absenteeism, the issues that we're seeing, the achievement gaps, they go far deeper than these problems are too big for
people at school sites, even highly trained professionals to be able to solve.
So it means partnering with law enforcement.
It means health providers.
This is a much bigger conversation.
I'd be happy to speak and share what we've learned in our community, but we have a licensed marriage and family therapist on site at our learning center, a licensed clinical social worker
to work with families and to support our students to keep them in school because it's critical.
So it's really a systems approach which is what you're all working so actively to do.
So I applaud your efforts and for shining a light so honestly on what you're in your unique context how this is showing up and how everyone is keeping the focus squarely where it should be on our students.
So thank you.
Board Member Valdez.
Good morning.
Thank you all for being here today.
I really appreciated hearing the stories and the lessons and for Melanie coordinating this.
For me, this is about a process and no matter what level it is, and it's really more about enjoy the journey, not just the destination.
And I'm hearing that from you as leaders, as thought partners.
I really like the way Mr.
Alejandra, how you did the counties coming together.
I think that that's really important.
I'm from Riverside County and just that idea of impacting a million kids, imagine the possibilities and the point of impact.
So I think that this has really developed county-level leadership as well as district-level leadership.
And we've talked about board politics and different entities in school and site leadership.
But there's that cabinet level group also that I think needs lots of attention.
So if they're high functioning, I think the district functions very well.
And so that's just another area of attention.
I really would like to hear from Dr. Estrada because I would suspect that most of you have your schools are engaged with a special ed, which is really a general ed concern.
And so that would be really interesting to see their thoughts and how they are approaching that.
And I really like the way, Shasta County, that you addressed the appreciative inquiry of what's going well.
Because I think if we start from that point, this is all about developing relationships and that is the key.
And so in building capacity and having shared leadership, that is so important along the way.
because if you don't have that and someone leaves, then you're starting from scratch again.
So that ability and the capacity to have relationships is so important.
So the question was asked that, how are you as counties and districts, if you will, having enough capacity of resources?
And so I would ask that of the collaborative too.
How are you able to have enough staff or outreach to be able to do that?
That's just an overarching question.
I know it's been asked before.
But finally, how do we capture these stories in an integrated way?
Because there's so much that has to do with wraparound services with outside agencies.
And that's the beautiful thing, because all of these other agencies, we all have important jobs, but we all speak different languages in different agencies.
So it's that bringing together, that coordination of services.
So I think there's a lot of good things that have happened, and there's lots of different places to go and plug in.
But is there one thing that has like an integrated system that captures the work around the systems somehow or another?
YouTube videos and stories, all of the things you're saying.
Because for me, when I go back, I will always say, oh, you should have heard at the board meeting what they said or what they shared.
And I know that they could go back and look at the video.
But it would be really great just to have this thing where you could just click and hear the stories, because it's the stories that's going to change.
Because again, this is a process.
It's not a formula.
I appreciate the question or the comment.
We actually have hired a communications person to help us with that specific need.
And as a result of that, we have put a podcast together that really go tell the stories, even of the work at the county level as well as the district.
So with the work that the CCE is doing, there will be a podcast, well we've just released a podcast, El Dorado?
for Eldorado, and we will be releasing one of our podcasts for Palo Verde, which has been the longest partnership annual.
We just previewed a bit of it last night to the board, and very exciting.
So we recognize that it is about capturing the stories of where it's working and why, and also determining how we could use that to better inform other agencies.
And it is a shameless plug for the CCE website.
Anna Tintocalis is amazing.
Many of you may know her from KQED and her vision of really informing the general public about the journey of education and touching hearts and minds.
It's very visible in the work she does and the podcast.
And so this should be intuitive and easy to find on the CCE web page.
And we're looking for ways to kind of further get those stories out all in support of public education in our state.
Do you have an app as well?
That is a great point.
We'll ask.
Yes.
We'll take it back.
Okay, I think now we're ready for public comment.
I may.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Very briefly, following on all your so positive comments and Karen's look at how do you link arms with other agencies, just note that in San Bernardino, Ted led the way, working with James Ramos, who used to be a board member here, was on the board of supervisors to put in a
a joint session together between the school district and the county, which looked at how to access healthcare issues, healthcare services, truancy services, police services.
So that's just one other, each of you in your own ways have shown how you are building teams, and sometimes it's with neighboring school districts, but the county is a very fruitful area to work in because of their connection with families and young people.
So to all of you, A+.
I thought Ted and Judy and Socorro, A+.
I'm so encouraged.
Thanks.
Will the following people please line up at the podium?
Mary Perry and Liz Gann.
Good morning.
I'm Mary Perry and I'm representing the California State PTA.
And we've heard so much this morning about the challenge of moving the culture of schools around continuous improvement and this system of support.
And as the largest parent advocacy organization in the state, we at the California State PTA see that parents also need to develop that understanding.
They can be partners rather than political opponents in this process if we do that well.
So one of the things we need are some parent-friendly explanations of what this system looks like, what is continuous improvement.
Rather than talking about root cause analysis, let's talk about the why underneath the outcomes.
But beyond that, I think it's really important that the state board and the department continue to shine a light on local indicators.
They are foundational to these student outcome indicators.
Those shiny pies are distracting.
And we need to really look and elevate the places where the local indicators are being used well to engage stakeholders and to really do the work that needs to be done.
Thank you.
Good morning, I'm Liz Guillen with public advocates.
We submitted a letter for our coalition of groups advocating for for equity and students on the ground and parents on the ground.
I wanted to
Also say that this was great information presented today But we want to make sure that all districts and charter schools are motivated not and supported to do better and not simply to avoid or avoid being identified for differentiated assistance but to improve for that that goal itself and
At the same time, we have concerns about districts and charters that are within striking distance of being identified.
We think that they want to, they should be engaging with their community stakeholders to make sure that they understand that there is a self, that they need to develop a self-guiding process.
Time.
Also to thank or to appreciate that the equity coalition organizations are part of the system of support planning group.
It has been very helpful.
I look forward to it.
Thanks.
All right.
That ends the public comment.
And Melanie, do you have any concluding comments?
No.
Okay, good.
Then the board will take a break and we'll reconvene at 1030.
OK.
We're now ready to start item two.
This is a three-part item.
We'll have the college and career indicator.
Then we'll have the growth model.
And finally, we'll have the graduation rate for alternative schools.
So there's a variety of presenters here.
So Cindy Kazanis will begin.
Good morning.
I am Cindy Kazanis, the Director of the Analysis, Measurement and Accountability Reporting Division.
And as President Chris said, we do have this as a three-part conversation.
And so after each of the parts, we will break for a board member, a board discussion, and especially on the last two parts for technical clarification.
So without further ado, I want to turn it over to my colleagues from down the road from San Juan Unified School District.
When we asked Susan Green about a week or so ago, maybe it was two weeks, if she'd be willing to present, she jumped at the chance.
She's been a great supporter.
She has been prior or maybe is currently still in the leadership of the California Education Research Association.
And so she's well known to department staff.
And so I wanted to thank her and her team
for coming this morning to present.
And a particular note, this is on the college career indicator.
This is something that you haven't necessarily heard from districts on.
And so we want to make sure that as you prepare for the release of the dashboard this fall and you see colors for this indicator, there's an emphasis on what school districts are doing to prepare for that.
So without further ado, I will turn it over to Susan and Rick and Brett.
Good morning, President Kerr, Superintendent Torlakson, members of the board.
My name is Rick Messer.
I'm the Assistant Superintendent for Secondary Education in the San Juan Unified School District.
I'm here today with my colleagues, Susan Green, our Director of Assessment, Evaluation, and Planning, and our Director of CTE, K-12 Counseling, and College Career Readiness, Brett Wolf.
Today we're here to share with you how we're aligning our college and career readiness work in our district and the work we've been doing over the last number of years to the work that's been developed in the new data dashboard and how the college career readiness dashboard is really helping us align our work as we go forward.
In San Juan Unified, over the last few years, we focused, we have been focused on equity.
And when we make decisions, we've made it a conscious effort that whatever work we do, we look through a lens that we are making sure that we address all aspects of our district.
And if you take a look at our indicators, which we look at when we make these decisions, we ask ourselves, who are the specific populations affected?
And what's the potential impacts on those populations related to the programs or the activities we're creating?
In what ways does this activity or program ignore or worsen existing disparities?
Because we're looking at not just the overall, but we want to look deeper, deeper into our district, deeper into every student that sits in our classrooms.
We also want to look at the unintended consequences of great ideas.
And what we've learned through the past is we've found some really great ideas, but we never,
paid enough attention at the bottom where the support was to address the unintended consequences.
We've also looked at how have we intentionally involved all of our stakeholders, a key component to this because it moved beyond just graduating from high school.
There are many components that go into this and how do we get that impact on feedback and the loops.
And then finally, what are the barriers to reducing the predictability of which students fail with this policy?
looking deeper into the outcomes.
This is very important.
Again, going back to the good ideas and how are we going to mitigate that to make sure that our students are prepared and ready to succeed in our district.
So in San Juan, when we look at college and career readiness, we look through a lens of equity, opportunity, and access.
And we've added a fourth component, which is the support.
So over the last few years, as we've looked deeper into how are we going to make sure that our students are supported both academically and socially and emotionally, how are we going to make sure we move all of our students to that place where they're going to have that opportunity?
Over the last few years, we started about two years ago to update our graduation requirements.
Up until two years ago, our graduation requirements met the state limit for requirements.
They were not aligned to the A through Gs.
Over a two-year process, we've now revised our graduation requirements to the A through G requirements of the UC and the CSUs through an opt-out model.
So again, our old system was an opt-in model for those students who were aware and understood or came from a background of what it meant to go to college and to be prepared.
We felt that to give all of our students that opportunity, we needed to change that.
So through a lot of work and a lot of feedback,
We've created a new graduation requirement for our class of 2023, our current eighth graders, that basically are going to have to opt out of an A through G track.
That means we're gonna have to communicate better.
We're gonna have to meet with parents.
We're gonna have to talk to counselors.
We're gonna do things differently because the students have a voice now on that pathway through our system.
We've worked over the last two years in our college, our career technical education opportunities.
We've had some very traditional programs in our district that have been very successful.
But when we look deeper into our programs, who were we really supporting and what was really
the purpose of the program, what was the unattended consequences, and was it really meeting the needs of the students in a career path, or was it just a separate path than college and career readiness?
So we've looked deeper in those opportunities, and Mr. Wills is going to share with us that work.
We've also found that
comprehensive high schools don't fit every student.
And so we had to, again, look at the students and the supports we have in our alternative programs.
And we've developed enhancing our independent study programs.
We have a traditional continuation model, but we've changed it.
It's not what it used to be.
It's not what the old continuation, if you understand what that probably was, for students.
It's a much different model.
It's a much more welcoming model to help students stay on a path to success.
And we've created a new school just this year called the UnSchool, which is a project-based learning school for students.
It's a school with no walls.
It's a very engaging process of learning for students and staff.
Again, but looking through a lens of what
Not every student fits into a box or a hole.
We have to find ways.
And then finally, our work with our community and the dual enrollment through our community college.
We do a lot of work with Los Rios in our district.
We sit here in suburban Sacramento.
And again, we have so many resources and partnership.
We're now back building with them, creating dual enrollment opportunities.
And finally, promoting college readiness was a key because when we listen to our students, it's not as much of our high school students that were unaware.
It was our younger students and parents saying, we don't even know what the college.
We thought when a student graduated from San Juan Unified School District, they would be college and career ready.
Just by the old graduation requirements So we knew at that point we had to move further and we've we use Naviance as our college career planning tool We moved it into the sixth grade and up in our upper elementary schools as well to start building this conversation and then finally
Supporting all students to succeed is pretty much the key to all of this.
Our focus in a district over the last few years now is embedding more social and emotional support systems, key to this whole path to success.
But with the dashboard, we feel now we have a tool that can align with the work we're doing to help us measure as we go.
And so I'm going to turn it over to Director Wolf to give us more of the details.
Well, good morning.
So when we began the work, when the CCI, the College Career Educator, came out and we looked at the elements, we got really excited because, as Rick just mentioned, when it comes to A through G, just a couple of years before we started the work to move our graduation requirements from the minimum that the state said we needed to have into, let's make sure that every student is eligible when they graduate to get into either a UC or CSU.
So we've been working now with the whole A through G, educating our younger students and families about this is what it's going to take.
Because as we know, when they get into high school, they're middle of their ninth grade year, and they say, hey, you know, I want to go to college.
And we look at it, it's like, okay, so we are on the wrong track.
We're going to have to do some catch-up.
It's a whole lot of work.
So we're really going to get down now into the elementary and middle school grades to make sure that we communicate what this is going to look like, what it's going to take, make sure we have the interventions down early on.
So when they get into high school, we can get them on the path where we can get them into a college if that is what their choice is.
As far as advanced placement in IB, one of the second indicators of the CCI, one of the things that we've been doing is we noticed that when we looked at our data with that, we had basically, you know, the certain segment of our population that was accessing the AP classes and being successful with them, and also with the international baccalaureate.
So we've actually contracted with an outside group called Equal Opportunity Schools, EOS, and what we've done is we've identified students who have AP potential,
All right, and so with that now we're trying to get them into the AP classes and also the IB.
One of the things along those lines, we offer the PSAT now for all 10th and 11th grade students.
The PSAT is a great indicator for a lot of things, but one of the things it does is gives us information about which students have AP potential and also in what areas they will be successful in.
And so that has shown us, for example, that we weren't offering AP Computer Science.
We weren't offering a lot of AP Psychology.
So we're really increasing our offerings with that.
As far as dual enrollment goes, this is something that's not quite so easy.
So, we've got some partnerships now with both Los Rios and CSU Sacramento, but it's not quite as easy as we thought it would be.
Through Sacramento State, they have a program called ACE, which is Accelerated College Entrance.
And so, basically, it's a one-on-one partnership with
a college professor, and one of our staff members.
And you have to have a content area master's degree, which is tough.
A lot of people don't get the content area master's.
And then it's getting that partnership.
But as soon as that teacher leaves, we lose that agreement with that class.
One of the things we're doing now with our CTE program, those are academic courses with Sac State.
With our CTE program, we're partnering with Los Rios with two of our CTE programs.
And just a little bit about dual enrollment.
Remember, this is where you're getting both high school credit and college credit.
And this is also where you start your college transcript.
And so again, it's a big caveat to the families that if you get a bad grade in this class, this may affect you when you apply to medical school after you've been out in the field for a long time.
So one of the things then as far as with our CASP, the state testing, we've adopted the state textbooks.
We're doing all those things, but we're really working with that is really just improving our best first teaching.
And that's one of the things that we're doing
all the way with interventions down at the elementary and the middle school levels, but also the high school level.
And then also just using the best practices for assessment.
You know, when we looked at our different schools and some of them try to rush through testing, and if you go to the CAST website, it tells you exactly, you know, this is how you pace out the testing.
So we just want to make sure that we're doing exactly what we're supposed to be doing.
And then lastly, I'm saving this for last because this is, you know, something I'm really excited about is our CTE programs.
So we've taken advantage of the CTE incentive grants, we get to Perkins, we get all those things, and it's really do we need to improve and enhance our programs.
And so we're using the research about which jobs are available in the Sacramento region, making sure that we have things that are attractive, using this money to make sure that we have the technology so when our students graduate and if they want to go into the medical field, the dental field, that they're actually
learning on the same machinery, equipment, technology that they'll get in the workplace.
So we're really excited about that.
So when we talk about the college and career indicator, when this first came out, we really got excited about it.
And the reason is because as a former high school principal, we talked to our families about, OK, so your student graduated from high school.
So they're eligible to do these things, but are they really prepared?
Are they going to be successful?
And so with this new indicator now, it basically says, if you've done these things, if you've got a high school diploma,
and your A through G, and you've passed this three-year CTE pathway, you are prepared now to have success beyond high school.
And so when you think about the prepared, the approaching prepared and not prepared, it really gives us an opportunity now to go into our middle school families when they register for high school, and we can start having that conversation about, okay, so, you know, your son or daughter is going to be coming to high school.
You know, these are some of the things we want to make sure that we do.
We've got a smile over here.
So um but it's one of those things where we got to make sure we communicate and which pathway do we want to go on and so it's um it's been great for us at the site level to have that discussion.
And then again, we just want to make sure that as we go through, we work with our students.
We want to make sure we get down to the elementary.
We don't want to be a surprise halfway through their high school experience that, hey, you know what?
You're going to have to go to junior college.
You don't have an option.
Or, hey, you know what?
You're going to have to go spend a whole lot of money to go to a technical school to become a dental assistant or a medical assistant.
It's tens of thousands of dollars to go to those.
And it's free if they come to our schools and do that same work.
So this time, I'll go ahead and turn it over to Susan.
So as we got our dashboard this fall, like Brett and Rick said, we were all excited to really start to see what information we can get from that and really drill down into how it can help us.
And the first thing we did was to really look at the different indicators on the dashboard for the class of 2016, which is what was released last fall, and see what did it tell us.
And we were in a room, actually, with all of our cabinet level and all of our Division of Teaching and Learning staff, and we were looking at it.
And the first thing we noticed was our CCI indicator was only 40.1% prepared.
That kind of was shocking to us, especially when we looked and our graduation rate was 89.1%.
And that in itself had a huge conversation that started to talk about what Brett was talking about, this idea of we might graduate them, but were they really prepared?
And what were we doing about it?
We also started to look at our special populations and we are a district that did go under differentiated assistance for our graduation rate for African American foster youth and students with disabilities.
So we've been really drilling down into what are we seeing and we know with
foster youth and homeless, which we have a good population in our district, that they have different graduation requirements because of the law, they can graduate with less units.
But how does that affect them being college and career ready?
And what can we as a district do to kind of support them and help them?
That was a
great first picture, but what we really wanted to do was drill down into the data.
So the dashboard gave us that first picture, but along with the dashboard came something called the College and Career Readiness Report, which allowed us to drill down to also the methods or how they qualified.
So that bright sheet that Brett showed you that I think you guys have a handout in, we really started to look at where were our kids qualified.
And we had some
preconceived notions that actually became not so true as we started to drill down into the data.
Of our 40.6% of our kids prepared, 90% of them were prepared through the A through G and additional criteria method.
And we actually thought that we would have more that would have also qualified under some of the other methods.
This is where we actually found that our dual enrollment qualification was zero.
And so it really helped us figure out what was going on and where do we need to go.
But honestly, the place that we had the most conversation with our schools is in the approaching area.
So, the approaching information lets you know, in a lot of cases, what was the one criteria that school students might have met, but they missed something else.
So, when we looked at our nine comprehensive high schools, we had two schools.
that had between about 10 and 15 percent of their population, their senior class, that met the CTE requirement, but then didn't meet the additional measure.
That additional measure meaning the minimum scores on SBAC or an AP score.
Okay, we kind of expected we might see that.
We had five of our schools that had about 15 percent of their population that met
the A through G, but didn't meet that additional criteria.
But I think what shocked us the most was we actually had six of our schools that had between 10 and 20% of the population that actually met the minimum Smarter Balanced qualification of a two and a three, but didn't meet the A through G or CTE.
And that really shocked us when we started to look at it and said, hey, wait a minute, maybe are we doing, these kids actually are performing better on the assessment than we thought, but yet they're not meeting the A through G or CTE, so how do we help support our students?
As we went through that, we are now starting to drill down into our data and into our subgroups.
And we actually are very excited, and I know that's a weird term, but to get our class of 2017 and class of 2018 data, which should be out this fall.
Because one of the questions is, you don't ever want to make decisions just based on one set of data.
And so really, are we seeing those same information as we move forward?
Really, what we're working on now is, as Brett and Rick talked about, is increasing opportunities, building partnerships, making sure we have the supports.
And then lastly, we're trying to figure out with College and Career Indicator, how do we start to build those yearly benchmarks that we can monitor progress of students as they go from 9th to 10th to 11th to 12th grade?
Because otherwise, 12th grade is too late for you really to make any changes.
So we're actually starting this year with our class of 2019.
The first thing principals are going to get this June is their SBAC results on where are those kids and where are they in terms of meeting A through G to start to look at, do we have students that meet that qualification?
Because when we looked at why some of them didn't meet the A through G, sometimes it was only one class.
And so how do we help support them along the way?
So that, I want to thank you guys for the opportunity to share this with you and I will turn it back over to Cindy.
Great.
So this is the first segment and we wanted to make sure that we gave members an opportunity to ask questions.
We'll take questions because these segments are quite different, you know, in that regard.
Thanks for this.
Really, for me to see how you can inner work these variables and indicators to find out what's going on was very helpful, very illuminating.
Board member comments, board member Sun.
Hi, thank you.
Really appreciate the presentation.
In two ways.
One is just the, I guess, validation of the work that we're doing at the state level with the college career readiness is prompting you, prompting districts, LEAs to look at that data and see if you can kind of hit those benchmarks.
So it's very good to hear all of that.
The other is that I also appreciate you highlighting the challenges of those partnerships with dual enrollment and the CTE pathways and the articulation piece of it.
So because I, as a single school, trying to navigate my way through making those opportunities happen for my students, I can see how I know how difficult it is.
So just a plug for the Workforce Pathways Joint Advisory Committee.
We are working on some of these principles, some ways that we can at least articulate and work with the community college system so that we can make those pathways more smooth.
And so that it's not individual organizations trying to find individual partnerships.
And sometimes, as you pointed out,
individual people having those connections.
The other thing, and then now my comment more on kind of the larger CCI, I do think that we need to probably look at this a little bit more.
I think as we've examined, we're starting to get data now.
and districts and schools are working through that.
I do question, for instance, the structure of some of this where we have said advanced placement score of three or higher on two AP exams actually overrides the completion of four years of A through G.
And so there's some structural pieces that I think as we are collecting data that I would like to see us do a little bit more research on and what happens with that if the student is meeting the score three on two AP exams, really is that student truly college ready or just scored really well on two exams?
So those are some of the questions I still have around our indicator.
Great.
And I forgot to mention, I should have started with this, that we released a memo in April that talked about really the technical validity of the current model.
That was in reaction to your requests from a previous meeting.
So if you haven't had a chance to look at it or members that are listening to this or audience members, that is a great memo that talks about really how we got to where we are with the current model and what steps are ahead.
So thank you for reminding and thank you for the feedback.
Any other questions for Member Strauss?
I just thank you so much, the whole San Juan team and for Cindy for inviting them up.
So I think it really helps see what the policy, what the implications are for practice and the kind of decisions that districts have to make in looking at their practice from graduation requirements to counseling far before they get to high school and certainly looking at middle school and your use of college advisement and kind of thinking of what your graduation and pathways ought to be.
So I think you really help kind of see what the implications are.
And that it takes a whole team.
And that if you've lived in high schools, you understand the complexities of advising students and giving them credit recovery and options and ensuring they do.
I mean, parents do trust us to do the right thing, but I think it's complicated.
And I think you bring up many of the considerations you've had to look at.
So I just want to thank you for so much for doing that and know that we still have work in progress.
your work is going to help inform both our intervention and support for districts.
And understanding too that when you get needing targeted assistance, how do you go about addressing it based on the dashboard?
And I thought you also helped look at what the CCI reports give you to see the percentage of students almost prepared or prepared and what those indicators mean.
And I think there's additional data there that really helps guide that.
So again, I think you're helping to inform the bigger picture and taking time out of your day
in May before schools closing is really, really much appreciated.
Thank you.
So I also want to thank you.
I appreciate you being here.
And I was going to shout out for your memo, Cindy, too, that I hope that all board members had a chance to read it because I think it's it's a very good history of how we got to where we are with the CCI.
and where we might need to go.
I think there's a lot of confusion out there about it, but I encourage everybody to look at it, and it does provide both a historical context and the technical kind of development of it and the soundness of it, but what we need to do going forward.
I also, I really appreciate you calling out and really talking about the difference between the state minimum graduation requirements and A to G because they are very different.
And in the absence of a requirement for A to G or your sort of clever way to get at opting out, which I think is brilliant,
Their students will not be prepared to go to CSU and UC, and I think that's a really important thing to do.
And I really appreciate sort of that you're questioning, you know, clearly you had assumptions about what was going on in your high schools.
And when you saw the data, you went, oh, you know, our assumptions need to be tested.
I really appreciate that and in following in the footsteps of board member Rucker I have to shout out all the teachers in San Juan because I'm a proud product of the San Juan School District.
I couldn't be here without you so thank you very much.
Good, okay board member Rucker.
Well, I also want to thank you for coming here today, not just because of the information you presented, but it also points out the work that's going on in schools to increase capacity to prepare students to make decisions or exercise their options after they leave your system to either enter the workforce immediately
or to enter college, that's very important.
And this comes at a time, and particularly in a school year, where CSU campuses could not accept over 30,000 students who are otherwise eligible and ready to go to college because they don't have that capacity.
And so the capacity issue about what high schools can do is different from the capacity issues about what colleges can receive.
But at the same time, we have to be realistic with students, not about the promise of college, but the opportunity and access.
So I'm curious to know, what are you actually telling students when they are completing this work?
or when they're beginning the work to do the work on the A to G about what it means to create the access and to create the opportunity, what are you actually telling them about it?
In our current work, I think it's fair to say we've grown to the fact to understand that when we looked at our data, not all of our students were going down the path which we wanted them to have the opportunities to make the decisions.
And I think what we're trying to commit to is that we want to address our students earlier in their careers,
and their families about the opportunities and what the access is and how do we help them get there.
And that's the social emotional support piece, that's the early counseling, that's the Naviance.
Once we can really start earlier and build that into going into high school, then they have a better mind.
Today we have students
that are coming through our system and we have credit recovery today to help support students graduate from high school.
We're doing everything possible today to make sure in two or three weeks those seniors are going to walk across the stage.
But our ultimate goal is that as our future goes, our credit recovery programs start to diminish.
and our more proactive program starting earlier and often is going to be embedded in their mindsets and that of their families.
So, they'll know, they'll feel it as they get closer versus where we are today, where we're still having to help push them and make them aware that they can do it.
So.
Court Member Valdez.
Again, thank you.
We really appreciate your time today.
I think this is a conversation about options to opportunities, and you certainly created opportunities.
And I really celebrate that idea of unschool, just the concept.
You'll get kids to go because it's not school, right?
But they're going to school.
So it's that secret sauce that you've kind of put in there.
What I did get, and I think was the spirit of how important leading indicators are, and you have turned lagging indicators into leading indicators, and I think you're a real model for how other districts can really monitor and support an early intervention, and I think ninth grade's too late, so I don't know if you're doing the PSAT in eighth grade, or the PSAT eight, or any of those kinds of things.
I'm interested in Naviance, I don't know about it, but I'm gonna go back and look into it.
But I do think that what you're doing in terms of using the data and not using it as a sanction, if you will, but as a learning tool.
So as leaders, you've done a great job.
So thank you very much.
Okay.
Thank you for that.
And I think we're ready for the next segment.
Let's just start off my conversation with thanking one of my favorite teachers.
So I'm going to do that now.
And actually, I thought about my most recent experience in education, and that's been in my graduate program at Syracuse University.
And my teacher was Dr. David Van Slyke, who is now the dean, actually, of the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs.
And what he taught that I enjoyed the most, and I still use it today in my job, is policy implementation.
And I was in graduate school at the time of Hurricane Katrina.
And we were able to use that as a case study in the spring semester about lessons learned and how agencies need to talk to each other and so on and so forth.
And so I do appreciate, and like I said, I still use those things today, because everything that we do and we present to you, we have to think long term.
It's not just how are we going to get over that bar.
We have to think about the impacts on various communities and districts and, of course, our students.
So with that, this presentation, I'm going to forewarn you, is going to be long and technical, and it may bring up some bad memories, I'm not sure.
Because we are going to reminisce the long journey of how we got to today, especially on the growth model.
So I wanted to forewarn you of that.
But thank goodness you get to listen to other people today, too.
So my colleague, Michelle Senner, will help present.
And then we will have a couple other members of my division staff and actually a former teacher walk you through
regression and growth models in general.
So you'll get an education today, I can promise you that.
We will also talk through and hopefully we're proposing action rather on the dashboard alternative school status.
So this is really your first step in the inclusion of our alternative schools in the dashboard.
And so we are bringing forward a recommendation on one of the elements, which is the graduation rate.
And then we're going to close out with just providing you a bit of update on where we're at with the dashboard for coming up for this fall and some user design features that we've been working on.
So we will pause after attachment one and attachment two.
Again, I think for technical clarification, and actually, there are gonna be various parts in attachment one where we've actually been asked to pause as well, just to make sure that you're understanding the content, and again, if you have questions, this is your opportunity to learn about growth models.
So with that, the recommendation today is that the Department of Education recommends that the State Board of Education approve one, the residual gain,
student growth model for further exploration and modeling to be considered for possible inclusion in the 2018 California school dashboard.
And two, the recommended methodology for calculating the one-year graduation rate for the dashboard alternative school status DAS schools.
So this is where we're going back.
We're doing our time machine, taking us back to where we started.
This is a graphic of the next several slides.
So I'm going to go into each of them individually.
But really, the most current method of this that we started was back in 2015.
We did listen to old board meetings in preparation for today's conversation.
And I will share with you what I learned that I forgot from those meetings.
But one of those meetings, Member Burr asked us about, wasn't this part of a piece of legislation?
So actually, this predates this timeline, but we're only going to start with 2015, the most recent version of gross model exploration.
So in 2015, back in September, as part of the development of the actual accountability system, you told us early on that you wanted us to start looking at growth models.
And so this has been our to-do list now for about three years.
With that, we started working with
There's actually a guide out there that came out in 2013.
My guide is a little messy, but the Practitioner's Guide to Growth Models, which was written by growth experts Catherine Castellano and Andrew Ho.
And we're really pleased that Catherine actually shifted from UC Berkeley to ETS since then and actually helped us with some of the simulations.
And so we'll talk about those in future slides.
So, we did begin exploring various guides.
This particular document is a product of our Council of Chief State Schools Officers, so there is a whole subcommittee of technical folks that work on things like this, and Michelle's peers in assessments.
So this has been really the beginning of, I would say, the most current exploration of growth models.
So based on this information in this growth model guide, which provides examples from other states, Colorado being one of the original states that adopted growth models,
We looked at how to incorporate that consideration with how Smarter Balance and the vertical scales work.
And so Michelle is able to talk through that as well as other presenters today.
The TDG did begin exploring those growth models back in 2016.
Rather, at the beginning in September 2015 and 2016, and I think probably every other meeting we've had since then.
So there's been a nuanced of the growth model piece.
And we have provided you several information memorandum on this.
And so this was concluded in an information memorandum about two years ago.
So fast forward to this long period of March to December, we were able to capitalize on the ETS contract to take advantage of their expertise in the growth model area.
We had a great team that we've been working with for that period of time and actually up through today.
Based on that collaboration and I think some of the information memorandums you put out, you requested additional information.
So we've gone back again and again to make sure that we're providing you, I think, the background you need to make the decisions that you will need to make over the next coming meetings.
In June of 2016, you got yet another information memoranda, this one talking about the design of a school and district level accountability system as opposed to an individual student growth and performance measure.
Michelle led a discussion, and you're going to see some of the slides that she presented back in January of 2017, about looking at criteria that you would use to select a growth model.
And there was, we did all listen to that discussion, again, in preparation for this meeting.
And in particular, President Kirst had some very pointed comments on where he'd like things to head.
And as I mentioned, Member Burr did.
I neglected to mention that in the September meeting in 2016, member Rucker actually had a long, a long, it was good, it was great, it was amazing.
But you actually had, I think we had 15 to 20 minutes worth of just your thoughts and feelings on growth modeling.
Okay, so for the record.
Okay, so they said that board member, that President Kirst made some comments, board member Burr made some comments.
When they say I made some comments, people laugh.
If I were more sensitive, my feelings would be hurt right now.
That was not the intent.
You, you, uh,
To be very upfront, this is a very difficult subject.
It's not easy to present on.
It's not easy for the general public to understand.
We have appreciated your guidance along the way.
I want to make sure that we recognize that you have along the way provided us guidance.
where you thought it was, you know, there was a place to do that.
And so your comments were very well received in looking back about what was discussed and what guidance we have gotten because you have not had an official motion on this particular subject.
And so we're very cognizant that it has been guidance to date and making sure that we're, you know, in keeping with that context, making sure that you're ready for this conversation and for perhaps a decision today.
So to just continue through our Wayback Machine, we're now in April of 2017, and that is when we had ETS work on simulations with our student-level data on the three proposed growth models that we gained from the discussion in the January meeting.
So with that, we wanted to make sure that we were
Keeping you in the loop, the simulations occurred over several months, and there was a technical memo that was provided that took quite a bit of time to prepare as well.
The information memorandum in June provided you just an update on where we were at.
We did provide the memo to you as an information memorandum back in February.
And we had Dan McCaffrey from ETS come out and present to our stakeholder group.
So we had a meeting in this room at the end of February and had good attendance.
Some good questions as well, I would say.
It is a very technical MAMA.
That's what I would lead with.
But for those that were able to get through it, this was their opportunity to ask the tough questions.
So since then, we have been working on refining some of the pieces with the technical design group, and then where it's been appropriate, we've brought it back to the local control funding formula stakeholder group.
So, as I mentioned, this is actually going to be a multi-step process should you choose to, you know, allow us to continue this work and select a growth model today for further exploration.
In July, what we would do is we'd come back and we'd talk about the placement of that growth model in the accountability system.
So, I think we do have work to do on that.
We need to get stakeholder input based on
Your discussion today, we also need to talk through metrics and technical refinements that we've been made aware of from our technical design group.
And we're going to do some special outreach over the next 60 days to certain stakeholder groups.
So we have this LCFF standing stakeholder group that meets in the off months.
We're also going to do a specific
Outreach to accountability CALPADS and our assessment coordinators to make sure they understand what's coming because this is this is very different and can be very a very powerful tool for them as we move forward for the 2018 accountability system and the release of the dashboard and then finally in September of 2018 what we have on schedule is an actual decision to include it in the accountability system again should the prior two steps move forward
So with that in mind, I'm going to turn it over to Michelle Senner to walk through these slides and give some perspective.
Good morning, Superintendent Torlakson.
Is it still morning?
A little bit.
President Kirsten, board members, Michelle Center, assessment director.
While you take a moment to absorb all those details that Cindy just gave you, let me acknowledge my favorite teacher.
My favorite teacher was Mrs. Bryant.
She was my science teacher for both biology and anatomy physiology at Lynnhurst High School in Marysville Joint Unified.
She not only was a great science teacher, and she made it very engaging, but she also helped shepherd me to make sure that I went to college.
So, very thankful to her.
So, before I get started on my slide here, I just wanted to also take a moment to talk about a meeting that I attended last week.
It was a Smarter Balanced Technical Advisory Committee meeting, and one of the topics on the meeting happened to be growth models.
It was a time for me to really reflect and realize how far we've come.
Sitting there, listening to the conversations that we had at that meeting and that we've had in, gosh, how far back Cindy's timeline just went, it makes you think back, because all of us here remember the days that we had before Common Core and the days that we had before the CASP system, where we could not measure growth.
So it really is an opportunity to remind us that we now do measure student growth right now.
We have Common Core Student Standards that allow us to do that, and we have an assessment system that allows us to do that.
So we are currently measuring student growth, and it's an opportunity for us to remember that, and that we have scores in our current system that do that.
It also, the technical advisors also brought to our attention that we should not feel compelled to adopt a single method for looking at student growth.
So the item before you today and the conversations that we have engaged in are really about measuring student growth for our accountability system.
But we should recognize that there are many opportunities that we have to display
converse about student growth and we may not decide to use the same methodology for all of those and that is an okay thing to do.
In fact, the advisors recommended that approach and that we should really consider the purpose for which we are talking about growth when we make that decision about which is the best method methodology to use.
So with that being said, let me quickly go over the criteria because I'm sure you all remember what I said in January 2017.
So we won't spend too much time on it.
But they were five criteria and my recollection is that you just love them.
So the first one is really about ensuring that we have rigorous technical standards.
In other words, we want to make sure that we produce reliable results that are valid for the purpose for which it is intended to be used.
And of course, today the purpose that we're talking about is the dashboard.
The next one is we want to make sure that it is capable of being included in an accountability system, in particular the dashboard that has now matured since the first time we talked about this in January 2017.
The next one is a growth model should provide a measure of progress of academic growth across the continuum of performance.
This is a very important criteria that you have.
We want the ability to show growth for all students, no matter where they are on that continuum of achievement.
The next one is the inclusion of all students.
We want to make sure that we have not only included all of our students in the growth model, but that we also have a common expectation of achievement for all students, regardless of school or student characteristics.
And finally, the growth model should provide information on academic progress that is easily communicated to educators and the public.
And in this case, that would be users of the California dashboard.
So that is a quick recap of the criteria.
Now I'd like to invite up Jenny Singh to talk more specifically about the growth models.
Good morning, President Kirst, Superintendent Torreson and board members.
I am Jenny Singh.
I'm one of the presenters.
But I'm going to start off with my favorite teacher.
So my favorite teacher and was a teacher that I had in eighth grade, Mr. Fitzgerald.
Truth be told, I had a crush on him.
But he was my favorite teacher because I went to school in Chicago, and we actually had to pass a test on the Constitution to graduate from eighth grade.
And as an eighth grader, I was very concerned about this because I thought the Constitution is really kind of tricky.
I'm not sure I have the ability to do that.
But Mr. Fitzgerald said, everyone in this class is going to pass that test.
because I'm going to teach you everything you need to know.
And he was absolutely right.
Every student in that class passed the test.
Not only that, though, I had to take the test again in 11th grade.
And all I did was go back to the notes that I had from my 8th grade class, reviewed them for about an hour, and I was able to pass the test in high school as well.
So that's why Mr. Fitzgerald, yes, because he was a great teacher.
He taught us how to take good notes in the process.
So that is my little memory about eighth grade and high school.
So I'm one of the presenters today and we are going to be talking about the growth model next.
But we felt it was really important to have someone up here to explain the growth model that had a little more expertise and had actually been working with growth models in the past.
So we are going to bring up one of the consultants from my office.
This is going to be her first presentation to board members.
So be nice.
Yes, exactly.
So it is my great pleasure to introduce Kimberly Muntink.
Thank you, everyone.
Thank you, President Kirst, Superintendent Torgson, board members.
I'm so happy to be here.
I'd like to thank my sixth grade math teacher, Ms.
Dunn from San Benancio Middle School in Salinas, California.
She encouraged me and pushed me to be as good at math as I could be.
And if that meant being in algebra at the end of sixth grade, then so be it.
She'd figure out a way to get us books.
and the capacity to learn at our speed.
And I thank her every day.
She's not with us anymore, but I really truly appreciate the impact she had on my life.
So I am hoping that my teacher skills as a former math teacher will help you.
I guide you through understanding really what the options are today for selecting a student-level growth model.
And just for review, what exactly is a student-level growth model?
We keep talking about them, but I want to make sure we clarify what it is.
And what they are is actually a way to measure individual student-level growth from grade to grade.
So it's different from what we have currently on the dashboard, where we're looking at schools and how they change over time.
What we're looking at is students growing vertically from grade to grade.
So for example, how they scored in 4th grade versus how they scored in 3rd grade, or how they scored in 8th grade versus how they scored in 7th grade.
So the three models that were evaluated by ETS in the February information memorandum were the change in distance to met, the conditional percentile rank, and the residual gate.
Now, each of these will be going through examples.
We'll stop after each one for clarification, making sure everyone's on the same page.
And then we'll go through the conclusions.
And then we can have further technical discussion afterwards.
Now, first up is change in distance to MET.
And I want to make sure that everyone understands that this is not what's on the dashboard currently.
It sounds like it is, but it's not.
What the dashboard currently measures is how each student in each grade is performing distance from level three.
So that first chart that we see, how a student performs and how far away they are from MET.
What we're looking at is how that changes over time.
from their third grade score and how far they are in third grade from how far away they are in fourth grade.
So we're looking at a different thing.
So I want to make sure that we're clear that that's different from what the dashboard currently reflects.
So a change in distance to MET determines if you're scoring higher relative to the proficiency threshold of MET in the current year than in the previous year.
And in our example, we have a student who scored 2,400 in third grade.
their score of distance from level 3 was a negative 32.
In fourth grade, they scored above MET at 2491, which was a distance from level 3 of 18.
The difference of 18 minus a negative 32 is a plus 50.
So their outcome variable for a change in distance to MET is a plus 50.
The outcome, so what we'd be measuring and what we'd be taking through, plus 50 is what we'd be looking at.
So that's what a change in distance to MET provides.
Any questions there?
Good, see, we're off to a roll.
The next one's a little bit trickier, conditional percentile ranking.
And what this provides is a relative measure of student growth on a percentile rank scale.
So I'm going to ask that everybody throw out their previous conceptions of percentiles from the API age.
Throw those out the window.
That's not what we're looking at here.
We're looking at literally dividing groups of students into 100 little pieces.
That's what we're doing with percentiles.
So what it's going to look at is comparing how students in one group performed in fourth grade based on how they performed in third grade.
And we're going to create little bundles of students.
So in this example, we're going to look at two bundles of students, one bundle that scored 2,350 in third grade and one bundle that scored 2,500 in third grade.
And we're going to look at how they receive their outcome, their percentile ranking, based on this.
So that first group, students who scored 2,350 in third grade.
We're now going to look at their fourth grade measures.
And here, we have four students.
They scored from 2,400 to 2,500 in fourth grade.
based on their grouping, which is they all scored the same in third grade, they're going to be ranked on their fourth grade performance.
So one student scored 2,500.
They were the highest performing in their group.
So they're in the 99th percentile.
That's their end rank.
And one student scored 2,400.
He was the lowest scoring.
He's in the first percentile.
That's how we get there.
So each of the outcomes is their percentile.
Now we're going to look at students who scored 2,500.
They also received the same percentile rankings.
Even though they scored higher the previous year, they're going to be divided into percentiles as well.
So here, the student who scored 2,500, they scored the worst out of their group.
So they're going to be in the first percentile.
And here, a student who scored, it took a student's score of 2,625 to get to the 99th percentile.
So the relative measure is really hard to compare because it's based on a prior measure.
So in our example, students who scored 23.50 in third grade, one of them with a plus 27 distance from level three in fourth grade, they're ending up in the 99th percentile.
But with that same exact score in fourth grade, a student who had previously scored 2,500, they're in the first percentile.
So it's not their latest score that we're judging them on.
It's their prior score that we're judging them on.
And so at every single score on the score scale, there's going to be a bundle of students.
And then we're going to rank their performance based on the next one.
Go ahead.
OK, first of all, hi.
Hi.
All right, so I just want to make sure I understood what you said.
In this particular model, we're looking at clusters of students based on a particular score or a group of students who scored in a particular score range.
So one, one single score.
One single score.
And then we compare, take, and for that group of students, you're comparing their score for the previous year with what?
So we're going to compare their score on the current year.
So we're going to take, so a bundle of students will be created at every single score point.
On every single score point on our current scale.
On the prior year.
Bundling students based on where they fell on that score point on the scale.
So if our scale runs from, so I can carry the math in my head, if the scale runs from 1 to 100, that's 100 distinct student groups, 100 distinct bundles.
All right, so then when these students say at that score that you identified, you look at all the students in that group, and then the following year, that's where I got lost.
What happens with them?
So then we're going to take the, so if it's 100 students in a bundle, then we're going to rank them all in that next year.
So we're going to take, you know, we create the bundle in the first year in third grade, and then when we get to fourth grade, we go, how'd y'all do?
and we're going to look at how, and we're going to order them from top to bottom and assign a percentile to them.
Okay, so that would mean, first of all, I don't see how you're going to explain this on that student score report that's two pages front and back, but that would mean we would have 100 distinct types of information for, again, for an example I gave to keep it simple for me.
It would mean that students who scored on the higher end of performance
Normally, parents would be accustomed to seeing that these are high-performing students.
When they get their score report on a growth model, their score report is going to say they're in the first percentile and they are high-performing students.
Hello.
So the action and the item today is truly just about the dashboard.
When I mentioned earlier there might be different techniques for different purposes, that's a good example of whether or not we would even entertain the idea of putting this growth model on the student score report.
We did ensure that when we negotiated our contract with our current contractor, ETS, that we included in their work for them to evaluate whatever this growth model is that you adopt, evaluate whether or not it should be included on our student score report.
So that is an action that we would take later, is to look at that and then come back to you all and say, is this something that would make sense to a parent?
So what she was saying in a very sweet way is I'm off topic.
But all right, thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
All right, but I just wanted to make sure I understood what you're saying.
So it's possible I could have a child who, because of their score, was in the 99th percentile.
And then the next year, based on their growth for that single point in that group of students they're in, they could be identified as something lower than the 99th percentile.
in that group.
So if you can think about it, a student with a loss score, all the students who receive a loss score, the lowest obtainable scale score in third grade, that's a bundle.
And one of those students would receive, in this growth model, would receive a ranking of the 99th percentile.
as well as someone at the highest scores in the scale, who got the highest score in third grade, and then however they did in fourth grade, one of them will receive the first percentile.
So in every single bundle, you'll be awarding all of those percentile ranges.
Any other questions?
feel like we got there.
I think we got the understanding on that one.
So here is residual gain, which is the model that is part of the action item today.
So the residual gain provides a relative measure of student growth on the current test scale.
And what it is operating from is a place of prediction.
And what we're going to do is use math to predict a current year score in either math or English language arts using both the prior year math and ELA scores.
So this is based on how a student performs relative to a predicted score.
And we're going to be predicting that score for them.
So I have provided an example.
that I hope we can work through.
This is a scatter plot of one district's ELA scores for fourth grade students.
And I didn't provide the whole states, because that just becomes a giant black blob.
It also broke my computer for a couple hours.
So this is just one district's information.
And we also are only plotting it against ELA scores.
I didn't include the math scores, because that creates a three dimensional graph, which again, would be a little bit harder to
read.
So I'm hoping that we're all good with this.
This plot simply reflects a student's third grade score and their fourth grade score.
So for every little dot you see there is a student.
And that's how they did in third grade and how they did in fourth grade.
What a regression model does is it creates this prediction, and that prediction is based on a line of best fit.
And if you're not familiar with the line of best fit, what it does is it's simply creating a slope that goes through the graph and through all the dots where half of the dots are on top of the line and half of the dots are below the line.
And that's what a line of best fit is.
So here we have, in this example, where the predicted line is.
And this is what we're going to say.
However you performed in third grade is how you should perform in fourth grade.
And all of the dots along that line are your predicted scores.
A regression model calculates the residual gain for each individual student.
So that little triangle there, that's the student we're going to look at.
And we're going to see how far that student's point is above their predicted line.
So that's their actual score.
And let's see how far apart they perform.
Well, it turns out it's 110 points above what they were predicted to do.
And again, that prediction is based on all of the students that have taken the test.
So again, my graph would be every single student value for the state of California for every fourth grader who had a third grade score.
In this example, that student was supposed to be scoring 2340.
They scored 2450.
And you can see they're kind of
They're kind of up and out of there.
They're a little bit above what they should be doing.
So their residual gain score, in this instance, would be a plus 110.
So the units we're using in residual gain are back to point values.
So are there any questions on that?
Good.
I think we're good.
So the conclusion of the ETS analysis between those three models.
They went through and evaluated each model against three criteria.
Their strength of relationships with background characteristics, or what we more commonly refer to as demographics.
The sensitivity school grade configuration and assessment content area, as well as statistical precision.
And the X that you see in the chart indicates that this growth model performed the worst on each of those things.
So it's not a positive recommendation, but rather not a negative one.
So the conditional percentile rankings had the strongest relationship with background characteristics.
characteristics.
And the change in distance to met was sensitive to both school grade configuration and didn't have as much statistical precision as the other models had.
And I'll invite Jenny back up to go through the advice we received from the CPAC.
So we did this presentation at CPAG and there was a very in-depth conversation.
So there was a lot of conversation about it.
But during that presentation, there was a question regarding the statistical significance of the growth models.
And there was a lot of discussion around that.
So we just wanted to make sure that everyone here understood, because I know we had some board members who attended that, that all three models that we're showing you do have statistical precision.
So that is not a question.
We also, I believe that most of the CPAC members really did support a growth model.
They thought that it could provide them a little more information about cohort growth versus school level growth.
So I think there was a lot of support for it, but a lot of questions on which growth model we should be selecting.
And again, I just wanted to point out that, as Kimberly pointed out earlier, there is, it's really important to note that the change from distance for MET growth model that ETS did is very different from what we have currently on the dashboard.
So they are really two different models and we need to keep that in mind.
So,
As we move forward later in discussion, we want to make sure that you understand that the selection of the growth model today will allow us to continue the exploration of incorporating a growth model into our system.
We don't have the bandwidth to dive a little bit deeper into all three models.
So we're asking you to approve the residual gain model so we can actually do a little more digging into that.
And so in your discussions, we're hoping that to prepare you for upcoming decisions based on the growth model that is selected today, that you would provide us with some guidance.
Are there particular questions that you would like us to address at the July board meeting?
So after reviewing these models and after your discussions and your decision, are there really some things that you want us to make sure that we bring back to you in July?
Are there specific analysis, if any, that you would like us to do?
Because we want to make sure that we bring the information back that is going to help you make your decisions.
And do you want us to be looking at various options and how to include the growth model in the dashboard?
So these are the topics that are going to come in in July.
So once the board starts the conversations and discussions, we're really going to be looking for some guidance on what to bring you back in July.
And with that, I think we're going to open it up for technical questions.
Okay, board member Holliday.
I understand that the deeper dive will take place on the one that we select today.
And yet, if in that deeper dive, it turns out that you decide, I think we made a mistake.
This is not the one we really should use.
It is a possibility that it would come back to the board for change, for more discussion.
Is that correct?
That is certainly a possibility.
Right.
And I just want to say that I know that we're not talking today about how these growth statistics will be reported, where they'll be reported and all that sort of thing.
But it's difficult not to think down the road, you know, and I'm sure lots of people have.
But with the percent, I am a fan of the residual by the way, because I think the percentile approach can be very misleading regardless of where it's reported.
Billy in the 1% doesn't necessarily mean he's a failure in so many ways.
So I am supporting the residual.
Board Member Rucker.
Okay, so I have several questions but I'm going to start with the one that still sticks in my mind.
So with each of the models you've identified there is something that defines a line in the sand that the growth model is predicated on that sets a bar that then from that growth model students either make gains toward that line or
they do not make gains.
So the question I have is separate from the way the data will be organized and framed for reporting in the growth model.
There is a line in the sand that is defined by the performance level descriptors that Smarter Balanced already reports on to parents in the student score report.
And that specific line is about the definition of proficiency.
For the line on this residual gain model that is about the prediction, that is only related to the performance of the student population.
That is not connected to the definition of proficiency.
Is that correct?
So, when the growth is reported for parents or when the growth is reported for the school, is the growth being reported about gains toward proficiency or gains toward whatever that line is defining for the population?
So that decision has not been made about the metric that we're going to use.
So one of the metrics we could use is the percent of students that met their predicted growth, which is based on how far they are from that line.
So that's one metric.
Or, so all of the metrics, I'm sorry, let me just step back.
All the metrics will be based on how far those students are from that line, either above it or below it, right?
So we can report the percent of students that met the expected growth, or we could do something like we do with distance from level three and do a,
and do an average of all the scores.
And so that's what my question is.
When we look at the dashboard in the gradations on the dashboard for the performance of the school, we're looking at distance from level three, which is the definition, the operating definition of proficiency.
My question is for the line that was shown, could you go back to your chart for the line that was shown on the residual gain model?
For the line that is shown, that line is not related to a definition of proficiency.
That line is related to the predicted growth performance for this, as it's shown in the slope of this population.
So my question is, if you were to add another line in this graph for where proficiency would be among the students shown on this, would that be a different line?
It would be somewhere different.
It would just be, because it would be a flat line.
Because we're going to look at, you would be looking at the vertical axis.
All right.
So, it would be, that would be on the straight across horizontal.
It would be straight across the score.
So, you'd be looking north-south.
All right.
So, and that's what my question is.
So, when districts then receive this information,
How are they making a, and I'm going to use the word connection, not correlation.
How are they making a connection between the students gains toward proficiency level three and the information about the students growth that's being reported in this model?
How is that connection actually, how do we get the benefit of figuring out that connection in this model?
It's okay to say I don't know.
Well, that's really not the purpose of a growth model, right?
I mean, the purpose of the growth model is, I mean, the expectation is that all students are supposed to grow, right?
That has not, how much they're supposed to grow has not really been defined with Smarter Balanced.
So this growth model that we're presenting, all these growth models are trying to make some attempt to define how much students should grow.
not where they are in relationship to level three.
So it's a different way of looking at your data at the schools.
You can look at how many students have reached or at or above level three, and then you can look and see how many students are growing.
how many are making the growth projections that we think they should be making?
Okay, so I think that's the answer I was looking for.
I'm going to hold off on the other questions I had planned to ask because you did more in giving, you gave the answer I was looking for, but now I'm confused again.
So I have to think this through.
Board Member Valdez.
So when I looked at the timeline when this conversation started in 2015, and I wasn't here when that happened.
And in some ways, we've been living in dog years since then because so much has happened, right?
And so I'm just looking at the current dipstick right now.
Our consumers, our LEAs, our charter schools, we're trying to figure out distance from that.
And so that's been complicated, but I think they're beginning to
I think we've got better communication for parents and all of those things.
But I'm just asking a bigger question because I wasn't here and it's the why.
Why do we need this?
And what I heard at the beginning for the growth model was it was a better indicator to measure our accountability system, not necessarily for at the school level to begin to say predictably this group of students should be over here next year.
It sounds to me, and maybe I'm confused, that a student one year could be in the 99th percentile and the next year could drop down to the 1 percentile.
Was I wrong on that?
That's only in that second model.
Because the end result is percentiles.
Okay, so I'm just kind of just throwing this out and maybe the board has already decided this and I'm way off on the mark, but also we're only talking about the whole group.
We're never going to say comparable groups by demographics.
We're saying just this whole group, this is how they do and this is how they should do.
So in the spirit of trying to find another school like my school that had growth, I would not be able to look at those.
I would not be able to filter those out.
I would just say this group was compared to my group and I don't know the similarities in the demographics.
That's outside of this growth model.
Is that my understanding?
Yes, that is outside of this growth model because the growth model, so when people, when we talk about demographics for growth models, then we're talking about adding demographics as a control variable in the growth model.
That still would not allow you to go figure out which schools are like your school.
That is something I think a lot of people got used to under the old system when we had the similar schools rank.
We're not doing that anymore.
So there is a possibility.
I mean, the board initially gave us guidance not to include demographics as a control variable, but that's a policy decision that the board could change if they chose to change.
But that still is not gonna address your issue of being able to identify schools that are similar to yours.
Yeah, can I follow out on that, just on this point?
It would be true on the third model that the demographics are somewhat in there, in that where students are scoring for three years is correlated with the socio and economic backgrounds at a very high level.
So I don't think it's exactly right to say there's no socio demographic aspect to the third model.
Yes, you are right, President Kirst.
It is true that prior test scores are very closely associated with socioeconomic status.
So putting another adjustment in for that, we can talk about that later, but that's, there's already some there.
Okay, go ahead.
I'm sorry.
I just want to stick on that point.
So in a nutshell, could you say why we're doing this?
I guess I just need to hear that.
Well, we were instructed to look into this growth model.
Remember, this instruction came, the board asked us to look into growth model when we first started building our accountability system.
We have done a lot since then.
I mean, we have put out the spring dashboard and the 2017 fall dashboard, and we're getting ready to do the 2018 dashboard.
Things look very different than they did before.
And I will say that, you know, growth models, a lot of people like the idea of a growth model.
A lot of states do it.
There's, I think, 47 states that have a growth model.
So, of course, you know, that was one of the things that this board had asked us to look into.
That's something that was being done throughout the country.
And we should look into whether we want to do that or not.
So we've done that.
So I think that the conversation is,
being where we are right now, do we want to continue down the road with the growth model?
Do we want to include it in the dashboard?
Or if we do want a growth model, do we just want it for information?
It could be used for research purposes.
There's a lot of different things that we can do with the growth model.
So the decision, I think, as we have these conversations over the next couple of months, is going to be
A, do we want a growth model?
And B, if we do, how do we want to use that growth model?
And it doesn't necessarily have to go into the dashboard as a separate indicator.
I don't know if you remember, but when we first started talking about a growth model, we were thinking about that the growth model would actually be the growth component of distance from level three.
So distance from level three would be the status, and then the growth model would be the growth component.
But I would gather that this probably isn't what we would want to do at this point.
So there might be some other options.
But let's stay on this a minute.
One reason and other board members why a growth model, I mean, just in my mind is that the sole way of judging growth from the distance of level three
really, to me, enshrines Level 3 as something like the old NCLB.
Everything's measured from a proficiency level, which is, that level is somewhat subjective in that it is determined by people who gathered in Dallas, and I think you were there.
So you're running the whole system off of a college and career level.
And anything that doesn't move towards that is written off.
So the growth model is another way of looking at growth.
We have enshrined growth as something we want to look at.
It's not just a status measure.
And so this is an added dimension to just moving from level three.
That's why I don't particularly like the first one in that regard.
Now, as to why, it's interesting that the former board really was pursuing the second one, the percentile thing.
And they were wanting to use it for teacher evaluation to build value-added models.
And then you could run teacher evaluation off these value-added models.
And they were interested in that.
In fact, they had ordered a study of that model only
the so-called Colorado model and this board said, no, we're going to not go with that.
So, we stopped that.
But they had a different purpose with that regard.
So, could you say that the rationale is, you know, that you need, since we're so much in
interested in using growth as continuous improvement, which underlines a lot, that this is a further measure that gives us a more robust understanding and ways to think about growth than just measure the distance from level three.
That, to me, is sort of NCLB on steroids.
You know, it bothers me.
And so, that's... Others might want to stay on this why question.
Do you want to address that, Board Member Sunnis?
Okay, you do, okay.
Well, so I would go back way before 2015 and actually President Kirst alluded to this, but and I think as in all things context matters and we're in a very different context than we were 10 years ago when probably this conversation began.
We have a very different test, Michelle brought this up and Tony's here and can talk about it as well, that's now vertically aligned that allows information about individual students to be used at the local level, knowing how they're moving through progress.
My understanding of a growth model, and I think it's captured in your criteria here, has to do with how schools are doing.
This is not intended to be an individual student growth model.
So I think that's a little bit confused in this conversation.
And I think it's helpful to go back to the criteria and understand that purpose.
So for me, and I think this goes a little bit to Karen's question, which I thought was right on the money,
We've now done a lot of work relative to our accountability system in this new context with a new test, with a new model that says we're going to measure status and change.
And so to answer your questions about what do we do going forward,
You know, I for one would say, and I've said this because we've had a lot of conversations about this, I don't want to have the department do a whole bunch of work because we were on this path in a different context if we're ultimately not going to need a growth model for the accountability system.
So I think it's worth sort of stepping back and going, where are we now?
We have growth, we have status and change.
What would a growth model on the academic indicator, which as I read this is what we're talking about, what would that add to our system that we have now?
Do we need that level of precision?
We're not gonna use it for teacher evaluations, which is what, which is I also think why 40 some odd states have it.
because they wanted to get a waiver under NCLB.
And they said, yeah, we're going to do it.
And it was proven to be a big bust.
So I just want to say, let's all kind of stop and go, whoa, what were we doing this for?
Is it going to yield, in one of our criteria, really helpful information for LEAs to make decisions about their students and how to provide a better educational experience?
So that's my advice.
Let's think about this in the context.
If we all think, well, yeah, it's worth having them do a whole bunch more work on residual gain, you know, I guess that's okay.
But I think we want to, again, say, where are we now?
What information do we have?
How helpful is it to LEAs?
To Karen's point, we're just now getting to the point where people are kind of understanding it.
I share your concern, President Kirst, about the distance from MET a bit.
But we did start down that path and we as a board and member Rooker, we can have a conversation about whether we actually picked level three, but because we're part of the consortia.
Yeah.
You know, we've gone along with the crowd to say, yeah, that's what college and career ready looks like.
And that's a metric that people are kind of pointing to.
So anyway, I just think we all need to kind of take a deep breath here and say, has the context changed dramatically?
Are we where we want to be with respect to the accountability system and the way we're measuring change?
And does that yield what we need to do?
Or should we continue down this path and then be making some decisions about what to do in the accountability system later this fall?
Board Member Sun was next, yeah.
You want to have this why question or move off of it?
No, I want to address the why question and also some of the other things.
So first of all, I completely respect Board Member Burr's perspective on this.
I, on the other hand, and I think the questions are good to ask.
I, on the other hand, I'm all tingly over this growth model concept.
You know, I think, so first of all, I think the residual gain model is something definitely worth pursuing and going and looking at that.
The reason, and I believe it is another way for us to look at information, and I know it feels a little bit like, wow, we just keep adding these indicators and we keep doing all this work and what's the purpose of it.
We've been talking about multiple measures, and I think this is a measure that we have not really addressed at the state level.
And
I, for one, not for evaluative purposes, but as a charter school, my whole theory of action is what my impact is on students.
And this is another way for me to take a look at that and in working with students on an individual basis.
So again, it's a different lens.
Whether it goes on to the accountability system, whether it's worthy of it, is it necessary, any of that, I don't think we will know unless we do a little bit more exploration.
So I would encourage that.
I know there's also a lot of other work that
Janie and her team are doing as well.
And I think it's just we maybe need to make a decision on the priorities and what needs to go.
But I am very excited about pursuing a growth model.
So the questions I would say if we were to pursue this, there's a couple of things I know on the technical end.
I would like to look at the grade level
Sorry.
As you're looking at students who go from one grade level to another, there might be less overall gain for students who may leave from a fifth grade to a sixth grade at a different school, for instance.
So the grade configurations and moving that.
from one school to another and if there's some impact around that.
And there's other things, too.
And I think there were, I know there were some analysis around demographic data, but wondered if you had looked at parent education level and if that was one of the
factors in looking at some of the information if we even, and I believe we do collect that as well.
So, I think the overall why question again is that it is a different lens and if we're looking at different ways of how we see schools moving forward, I would like to see this additional piece of information.
Can the department confer before we go to another, that this is for schools?
Board member asserted that, you never commented on that, as against for students.
It is, it is for schools.
We are developing our model for schools, but as Michelle's center had indicated, there is money in the contract for ETS to look to see if whatever our growth model is, should that information also be reported at the student level.
So that's a conversation that would happen, as Michelle said, a little later on.
Just to also comment on Board Member Sun's piece, this is built into our work plan.
The work ahead of us is something that we are prepared to do if the board decides to move forward.
I think what we want to make sure that we do is spend the appropriate time looking at the appropriate questions that you have for us.
And I think some of the questions or statements that Member Rucker has mentioned as well is we haven't had time to look at.
We've been so focused on trying to look at a growth model that we haven't looked at other potential ways to use it.
So it's been sort of our sole focus is just to get to this point.
Now if you, you know,
Ask us those kinds of questions and ask us to bring them back and in July we can then move forward with that because we'll You'll free up our time and looking at the other two models at least But that is something that we're committed to doing I want to make sure that I made mention of that remember holiday
I'm glad it's built into your work plan.
Member Burr was making me feel guilty about supporting this.
And I'm not all tingly about it.
But at the same time, I do think that the system of continuous improvement speaks to a growth model.
If a school has made tremendous effort in one way with certain groups of students to improve their academic performance, is this residual model, growth model, a reasonable way for them to evaluate whether or not their efforts really made significant change for those students?
I think the base for the model is really looking at grade over grade and looking at how students progress grade over grade.
So we're not ever combining all of the grades.
So we're looking at that jump.
So I think that there's a value in looking at student level growth, especially when you're getting down to the district level.
of evaluating that at a grade level and seeing perhaps that there's significant gains being happening between third and fourth grade.
And your student growth is huge there, but when it gets between fourth and fifth grade, there isn't something.
And where does that connect back to Common Core and your strands and how you're looking at evaluating it?
But also, where does it connect back to
your LCAP?
Where does it connect back to what you have planned to do for these students and implemented to help the students?
And where are we seeing the gains?
Where are we seeing the growth happening?
And I think, as Ching said, it's just a different lens, a better lens, and perhaps certain ways to support the efforts of continuous improvement.
But just to clarify, so change is truly looking at how, for instance, how a third grade set of teachers, how they performed one year and how they performed the next year to different cohorts of students.
So you're looking at how the students performed on those assessments in third grade.
How that teacher, year over year, and how that teacher, perhaps, in those classroom grades, are improving at,
getting the third grade curriculum to those students.
Then when we're looking at growth, we're looking at how students are prepared for fourth grade based on how they did in third grade.
And so those are two different things to look at.
And it's not more so, I don't think, anything that we've, you know, stated in the presentation, not this, which is better.
I think it's different and it's a different perspective.
And it does provide additional information, as board member Sun said.
Yes, board member.
So again, it goes to what the purpose of it is, and I think that's what we have, because we all agree that we want to see continuous improvement, we want to make sure that schools are successful with their students.
The question is whether or not one model over the other is better for accountability purposes, meaning, right, for the state level, for our policymaking, that's what the question is right now.
And will be the question in the fall.
Are we going to include it in the dashboard?
And therefore more LEAs will go for differentiated assistance or fewer will?
I don't discount at all what you're suggesting.
It would be incredibly important at the local level.
and Karen and I were having this little side conversation, some of this information is known now at the local level.
We heard about it in this earlier item.
So to me, again, I think we have to be clear that this is really a question about do we need this for our state accountability system?
And I, for one, would like to know what the benefits are of this over what we've already adopted.
Because again, we're in this very early implementation of what we've adopted.
And maybe it will turn out to be a lot better.
But again, I just want to make sure that we understand the differentiation of the purpose of this versus a growth model and making sure that LEAs have the best information possible to improve instruction.
Well, that question could be part of their further work.
That's what you're suggesting.
Board Member Strauss.
And just to clarify that too, we can also look into whether or not it would be on the dashboard just for reporting out purposes as opposed to incorporating it as a state indicator.
That could be a reporting factor, which you've asked us to do on a couple other measures as well.
So just to follow up.
So just for the board members, there are three of us were at CPEG and the study session.
And this it was this involved in this in-depth.
And I just appreciate staff, by the way, just helping us, walking us carefully through the options.
And so what I'm understanding is, is that the the task was to narrow down of the three options, which growth model
could would benefit from further exploration.
And through the work that CDE staff, the technical design team and CPAG were coming here to now recommend the one model for moving forward for further work.
We haven't adopted it yet.
Right.
And but there is agreement just to share with the board members that this is the better one to move forward on.
that the recommendation right now is that this of the three is the one that still needs more work.
We're not at adoption position yet.
And that if we give direction, I'm just trying to clarify this, if we give direction to CDE staff, they would then narrow their continued development in with the residual gain model.
That's what the proposal is in front of us today.
And then...
Yes.
And then you would come back to us with further work, further analysis, further recommendations built on what board members are saying, right, about its benefit, how it would be incorporated or not incorporated, how it would be used.
And then the board would be faced with a decision about do we use it and how do we use it and how and what are the options.
Am I right?
But that you want us to narrow, approve the recommendations so that you can continue to work just on this one.
And in my recollection, and I appreciate what Member Sung was saying, is that we always said we wanted to look at a growth model as a board, but we didn't at the time we adopted distance from level three or distance from it, we didn't have the additional study and tools ready to use.
So for
our accountability system we went to the distance for met as the model that was available at the time with the understanding that we would continue to explore the opportunity to look at a growth model.
So I guess I'm saying as one member I'd recommend that we approve the recommendation to go forward with continued study on this but I would look forward to continued
reporting back and our opportunity to continue to look at how it could be used or what benefits it have and all the items that our board members have been adding to your additional tasks to bring back to us for more discussion.
So I'm making that recommendation.
Yeah, that's right.
At some point we're going to need lunch.
We have to have public comment on this.
So, Board Member Rucker and then maybe... We have another item to bring up and then we were going to do the whole item as public comment.
But, I mean, it's obviously the discretion of the Chair.
Yeah, that's right.
There's another component.
Board Member Rucker.
Okay.
So, I suppose my concern is that I've heard a lot of, a number of confusing and mixed messages about what it is that's being contemplated by this particular action item.
And so I need to do a little bit of unpacking so that I understand what I'm actually voting for.
So one of the mixed messages I heard was there were these three models that were contemplated and there was some recommendation about the advantages and disadvantages of each of the three models.
And based on that analysis,
This is the model that you recommend further study is needed, that you recommend you do further study on because this one has fewer disadvantages than the other.
Is that correct?
That's correct.
Okay.
The second mixed message I heard was about what this would be used for because when we began this conversation, it was supposed to be in some way to be added information for districts about the performance of their schools or their students on these metrics.
By the end of the conversation, what I heard was about the value of being able to talk about what the third grade teachers did from year to year.
So I want to understand, is this action directing you to develop a tool for districts to use and looking at and looking at other information to analyze about the performance of their schools, which is where you started?
or is it about creating a tool for districts to look at the performance of their employees, which is the last comment I heard.
The former.
Okay, but then I need to understand the last comment I heard.
Could you restate the former?
This is designed to give schools and districts a tool to better understand the progress of their student population.
This is not intended to be a teacher evaluation.
That's not what she said.
And I apologize because I'm coming from a teacher perspective as a teacher and looking at things.
But that's not what I'm talking.
I was just trying to relate the current dashboard in a way that when you're looking at the dashboard, you're looking at a school's performance one year and then in the next year.
So how third grade teachers did one year versus how they did the next year.
And I relate it back to the grades because that's how it's third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth grades.
We're looking at each time in discrete things.
So I apologize for my terminology in that.
But we're just looking at how schools overall did one year, one set of principal, one teacher, teachers, students, versus how another group of students did with that same school the next year, versus how one student grew year over year.
There's no reporting on the dashboard by grade level.
Okay, that was my last question.
The last question that I was not clear on is exactly what is being reported or how, what kind of work you would be doing to figure out what to report.
I was left unclear about what that would be, how it would be added to the, whether or not, is this action contemplating or directing you to develop something that would be part of the dashboard, directing you to develop something.
that's reported about students are added to CALPADS because I heard some conversation about work with CALPADS.
I want to make sure I understand that this is a very narrow recommendation that the board is giving that this is not going to be a broad new implementation idea that what you're simply doing is studying how to develop a growth model based on this one particular methodology because I heard
so many other things that seem to be on the periphery connected to this action.
I want to make sure none of those other peripheral things you discussed are connected to this action today.
That's correct.
What you see on the screen is the action we're asking you to take.
And I think part of what throws folks off is that we say this is a student growth model.
It is a student growth model, but it is applied to schools and to districts.
It is not applied at the classroom level.
It is simply at the schools and district, which is consistent with what we have currently on the dashboard.
We're measuring the progress of schools and districts and student groups within those schools and districts.
All right.
So, I would normally ask, and I know we have, this is what's standing between lunch and public comment, not necessarily in that order.
Normally, I would ask for you to revise the language of the motion
so that we have a clear technical definition or name for this model.
But so I'm going to ask that when you come back to give more research or more information on what you're developing, that you also come back with a recommendation for a different name so that it's not called the student growth model, because that's very different from what is being contemplated here and what it's going to be used for.
So that we're not calling it something that it really is not.
Board Member Sun.
Yeah, so just another, so when looking at your analysis and doing the data too, I think this is also another way for us to look at subgroup growth and the residual gains of different subgroups and then how some schools might be doing more and you're seeing a better or
you know, larger gains than others or certain grade levels.
So I do think that there is potential here to look at some equity type of issues and data and looking at it a different way.
So as you're doing your analysis, when you come back to us, I'd like to see some of that.
Okay.
Well, this might be a good time for us to break for the lunch and then we have another item, very another complex item and then we'll have public comment and then we'll have an action.
So, the board will reconvene at 1225.
Okay, the board will reconvene and we're ready for attachment two on the alternative schools item.
President Kerr, Cindy Kazanis, Analysis, Measurement, and Accountability Reporting Director.
So this is, again, the Dashboard Alternative School Status.
This is our alternative schools piece that we're gonna present to you today.
And just as a way of background, because it's been, I think, several months since we've brought this issue to you, actually since last year.
What you asked us to do was develop indicators.
We're going to our way back machine for alternative schools that evaluate success and progress of these schools based on the local control funding formula, state priorities, and accountability requirements under the Every Student Succeeds Act.
So with that in mind, we have spent the last, I would say, 18 months to 24 months to look at how to develop these modified methods.
The intent has never been to develop a separate dashboard system for alternative schools.
This is not the old way of doing things.
The new way of doing things is to make sure all schools are included on the dashboard and to ensure that the indicators fairly evaluate our alternative schools population.
As way of background, the number of DAS schools statewide is just over 1,000.
Keep in mind we have about 11,000 schools, so this does make up population-wise actually more closer to between 11 and 12% of our student population.
You can also, I think this shows you a little bit of context too that we do have some elementary schools that are considered part of this model.
Elementary mean maybe even a K through eight school.
Ones that are dedicated middle and ones that are combined middle high.
When we talked about this this time last year, my recollection was there was a lot of schools that were on this list that had very small populations of students.
So what will the dashboard look like for fall?
Well, this is the beginning of that conversation for the DAS schools.
And we are committed to providing them a report, not just on the graduation rate indicator that we're going to talk about today, but on suspension rate, if it applies, the academic indicator for their grade spans, chronic absenteeism.
So you will see a full dashboard for alternative schools.
They have not received a dashboard in the prior year.
So in our spring field test and in the fall operational, there is a message that says that this is an alternative school and that we are developing measures for these schools for inclusion in 2018.
What I think gets missed is that this is not just school information.
A DAS school that is not a charter school belongs to a district and the district will also see those aggregate results and it'll get rolled up to the district level.
So districts will in turn be held accountable for how their DAS schools are doing starting in 2018.
We have seen what you see in fall 2017 just excludes that population of students.
So this is the first time this coming year that you will see that information rolled up to the LEA dashboard report.
And of course if they're a charter school, they're considered an LEA under LCFF.
So we have partnered.
It's been over a year collaboration with the John W. Gardner Center at Stanford University under Jorge Luis de Velasco's leadership to have an alternative schools task force.
And that task force has met once as a whole, and then they've had subgroups that have been meeting.
In developing this particular action item, we've been meeting with the state indicators subgroup.
There is also a local indicators subgroup and then a best practices group as well.
The members on the task force, and I believe that we provided you that, I know we provided you the membership list at least once if not twice over the past year, include representatives not only from school districts, county offices of education, large and small districts are represented.
Juvenile court schools and we recently were able to recruit somebody from a special education Local plan area from actually from the San Diego area and then we have actually a contingent of charter schools Represented as well.
I would say that I
all have been vocal representatives of their groups.
Sometimes we get two task forces, and we have working groups, and we have a small percentage of people doing the talking.
In this group, everybody talks.
Everybody has an opinion.
They are steeped in their knowledge of the alternative schools community.
They are passionate about it, and they want to build consensus.
And so what we are bringing forward to you today is something that has taken upwards of five meetings and various simulations.
Jenny will walk through how many were done to get to the point where we're at.
The other piece I wanted to just mention is what is an alternative school?
And just to refresh your memory for those of you that were here last summer, you adopted, obviously, in education code, majority of our schools are actually, that's how the alternative school community is mostly based, is based on this code section that's referenced, 52052G.
And then we, you as a board, adopted a new definition for schools to apply for this status.
So alternative schools of choice and charter schools had the opportunity to apply for the status if at least 70% of their school's total enrollment was comprised of high risk student groups.
And you actually took an amendment to that
measure because your advisory council on special education had some concerns with one of the measures.
So we actually have already refined the eligibility requirements for this.
The other thing that is different from the old model is that we are asking the schools that have to apply those that are not referenced in education code every three years.
So we're treating them as a cohort.
So our 2017 cohort, oh, well, I think I have some,
Information in just a bit.
Sorry.
Our 2017 cohort, we had 142 schools apply and provide us the appropriate documentation.
We just recently opened up the 2018 eligibility process for the DAS and we have to date about 27 applications.
I think we opened it up mid-April.
And keep in mind that, as I mentioned earlier, that majority of these schools are automatically in, and under education code there's 932 that are identified as DAS already.
So we are maintaining those lists.
Those lists are posted on our website if you wanted to know who's considered a DAS school.
It's in an Excel spreadsheet under the DAS program, which is posted under the accountability pages.
So I would say between
July of last year or May of last year and today what we've been trying to do is gain consensus from the alternative schools community and then start talking about communication around it.
So we have developed some handouts around DAS.
I think in the months ahead we will need to do some very aggressive communication to those schools about what their dashboard is going to look like and a preview of that so that they are prepared to start talking
with members of their staff and community members that follow the progress of those schools.
So what we're bringing forth to you today is looking at a modified method for DAS schools.
DAS schools, as I mentioned, will be held accountable for all state indicators that are applicable to their school makeup.
So if you're a high school, you'd get the college career indicator.
You would have suspension, chronic absenteeism, graduation rate.
So it will look and feel like a comprehensive high school.
We are suggesting today that we look at modified methods for select state indicators.
And the first one that we have done our analysis on and are ready to bring to you today is on the graduation rate.
So I'm going to turn it over to Jenny to walk you through the proposed methodology.
Okay, so I'm going to try to walk you through what the task force actually recommended for the proposed one-year graduation rate.
So I'm sure all of you know that our current dashboard uses a four-year cohort graduation rate.
Those are for the non-DAS schools or non-alternative schools.
And we feel that this is not, this measure is really not appropriate for DAS schools because they really do serve highly mobile and credit deficient students.
So many of the students entering these DAS schools are already on track to not graduate in four years.
So the task force really wanted to propose using a one-year graduation rate.
And we actually ran, I have seven here, and I believe it was seven, if not more.
Seven, I'm thinking maybe it might have been more, but it was seven simulations.
And you would think, really, how many methodologies could you come up with for a one-year graduation rate?
Well, at least seven.
So there was a lot of discussion.
As Cindy said, our task force members were very engaged in the subject.
Our meetings, we had five meetings.
We met from 10 a.m.
to 3 p.m.
with only a half hour for lunch break.
And we had conversations the whole time.
And we actually asked them to have some phone conversations in between.
So it was a lot of conversations about what would be the best methodology for this.
So let's go ahead and start off with comparing the two different types of graduation rates here.
So the four-year graduation rate, which is now, we now calculate that for all traditional schools.
We're looking at students who entered ninth grade in a particular year and we're looking to make sure that once a student enters ninth grade, what is their status in four years?
Did they receive a standard diploma after being in high school for four years?
So for the one-year rate, this is a modified method that we're going to use.
We're looking at something a little bit different.
We're looking at students who are in grade 12, and we're asking do those students receive a standard diploma, a high school equivalency certificate such as the GED, a special education certificate, or whether they were an early graduate, a grade 11 early graduate.
So every presentation that I give always comes back to the answer, why are we only going, they always come back with the question, why do you only use standard diploma for the four year?
So I'm going to beat you guys to the punch, and I'm going to tell you why now.
So we have regulations that we have to abide by from the US Department of Education on how to calculate our four-year graduation rate.
And they specifically say that only students who receive a standard diploma can be counted as graduates.
We, however,
At the department, we do put on DataQuest those students who receive a GED, an adult education high school diploma, and those students that receive a special education certificate.
And we actually say that they're completers.
But when it comes to the four-year rate, they're only counted as graduates if they have the standard diploma.
So for this one year rate, which students are we going to include in the numerator?
So we made the decision that to be included in the numerator, students had to meet all three of the following requirements.
And I'm going to go into detail about all three of these requirements.
It's the grade requirement, the certificate requirement, and an enrollment requirement.
So for the grade requirement, we do have limitations from the data that we have in CALPADS.
Truth be told, if we had the information that we needed about how many credits a student needed in order to graduate, we would probably select students that would be considered within range of graduations based on credits.
Although CALPADS does indicate how many courses a student took, we don't know what the graduation requirements are at each district.
They vary by district.
So that is something that we can't do.
The task force asked us to look into it and we did.
And they came to an agreement that that wasn't an option.
So we decided we were gonna focus on grade 12 students and also grade 11 students to count as early graduates.
So this means that if you have students in a DAS school that are grade 9 or 10 and they graduate, they're not going to be counted in the graduation rate.
So there is a big assumption here.
And the assumption is based that if a student is in grade 12, they have sufficient credits to graduate at the end of the year.
And that, I said, is a big assumption because many districts have policies where they put students in grade based on age.
I can't control the policies that are out at the various districts, but we had to make a decision on the best way to measure this for a one-year grad rate.
And so with the task force help, we came up with saying that we were going to use grade 12.
So we're also looking at students that have an adult status in CALPADS.
Those are usually students above the age of 18 who are receiving special education services.
And we're also looking at ungraded secondary status.
Most of the students, I'd say 99.9% of those students are students below the age of 18 who are receiving special education services.
Then we have the requirement of the certificate.
And we've kind of gone over this.
We're going to look at it a little bit different than the US Department of Education has.
So we're going to redefine a graduate.
This is the California way.
We're going to define it our way.
And so our way is we're going to say a standard diploma counts, but also we are going to count high school equivalency certificates, a special education certificate, and any student that receives an adult education high school diploma.
And then we have an enrollment requirement.
This was a conversation that we had a lot with our task force members.
We ran many different simulations on this.
We looked at, you know, counting students who were at the school from fall census day through the end of the year.
We looked at 30 days, at 60 days, at 90 days.
But the task force felt it was really important to take a look at how long they have their students because
they felt that they should be held accountable for those students where they could actually have an impact on the students.
And alternative schools have a very high mobility rate.
And so they have a lot of students going in.
You can imagine juvenile court school to stay is less than 30 days for most students.
And we have the dropout recovery school.
So there's a there's a large turnover rate.
So they really wanted to focus on enrollment and they settled on
at least 90 consecutive calendar days with an enrollment gap of 30 days or less.
So 90 calendar days means calendar days.
We don't have school calendars, so we can only go by calendar days.
So it includes weekends, holidays, spring break, that's all included in there.
And we have this gap because when we were looking at students at alternative schools,
There were many students who would be there for two months, then they'd exit and they'd come back and they'd be there for another two months and they get their diploma or their GED.
So,
If we didn't have this ability to show that they could have a little bit of a gap, those students wouldn't be counted as graduates, and we wanted to capture them, because we had quite a few students in that category.
Then we were also looking at summer graduates.
We capture summer graduates in our four-year cohort, but we wanted to make sure that we captured summer graduates in our one-year graduation rate.
So again, we don't have access to school calendars.
Many times students will be gone for 30 days for a summer break, but we don't know if it's a summer break or if they actually were gone and missed some instruction.
So if we said that they had to be enrolled 90 days to be counted in July, August, or September, many students would not be counted as graduates because they wouldn't meet the 90-day enrollment requirement.
And so we have no enrollment requirement for those students who graduate in the summer months.
We have a different enrollment requirement for adult and ungraded secondary foster youth or grade 11 graduates.
And that's that they must be at the school for at least 30 days.
Okay, now that we know who our graduates are, who are we going to put in the denominator?
Really important question because that's going to make a big difference on what the results are.
So, of course, it's all of our graduates.
They have to be in the denominator, including the summer graduates.
So who else are we going to include?
We're going to include all grade 12 non-graduates who have been at the school for at least 90 consecutive calendar days between June 1st
July 1st and June 30th.
So a regular fiscal school year.
And these are students that did not receive an approved certificate.
They dropped out or their lost transfer.
A lost transfer means they've indicated in CALPADS that student left to go to another school, but they didn't actually show up to the other school.
So if a student leaves the alternative school and they go back to their regular high school, that doesn't count against the school.
If they re-enroll in another school, that's fine.
So, we also had several conversations about the end size.
And the task force felt that because most DAS schools, alternative schools, are very small, and they're small for a reason.
They want to be able to address the needs of the students.
So they are small size and they felt like many of the DAS schools in the past were not held accountable because of their small end size.
So they really wanted us to do to reduce the end size from 30 down to 15.
So we did some simulations for them, and here's the results.
You can see that for the class of 2016 and 2017.
So for the class of 2016, we had almost 2,800 high schools.
849 of them were DAS schools.
Of those, with an end size of 15 being applied, 596 received a one-year grad rate, so about
You look at the class of 2017, the number of high schools actually dropped down to a little less than 2,700.
The number of DAS schools stayed pretty consistent, 846.
But the number that could receive a one-year grad rate with an end size of 15 is 583.
So remember that in order to receive a color on the dashboard, you have to have an end size of 15 in both years.
Right, so we would have no more than 583, about 70% of the Dallas schools would receive a color on the dashboard.
My guess is it would be smaller.
I did not look to see if all 583 of the schools in class of 2017 actually had an end size of 15 in 2016.
And so this is the chart we want to show you this so that you can see really what is the impact if we use a four-year rate versus a one-year rate.
So again, we're using two different years of data here, the class of 2016 and the class of 2017.
So what is the impact of the one-year rate?
So you can see for the class of 2016 that about 41% of the students would be counted as graduates if we use a four-year rate.
That increases to 53.8% if we use a one-year rate.
When we look at the class of 2017, the four-year cohort rate is 42.3% and the one-year rate is 55.2%.
So using a one-year rate does make a difference.
We anticipate that it will make bigger differences as we go down the road.
We anticipate, because I do know a few districts that have already done this, that districts will change their policy on how they place students in grade 12.
And instead of placing them in
Based on age they would place probably place them based on credits So remember this is done on old data where that wasn't taken into consideration Okay
We did have quite a bit of stakeholder engagement on this.
So we have had lots of conversations, more than one conversation with our advisory committee on special education.
We've talked to them on multiple occasions about the one year graduation rate.
But we've also had some conversations with the SELPA, with the Regional Assessment Network, RAN, the Capital Regional Assessment Network, CRAN, and with LCFF stakeholder groups, and of course with CPAG.
So the one piece of information that we received from everyone, or actually two, most of them were, everyone was really supportive of a one-year rate.
They thought that was really the way to go and that we should really move forward with it.
However,
they all voiced concerns that they were afraid that this one-year rate might result in unintended consequences.
So they felt that maybe the one-year rate might cause an unintended consequence of more students being transferred to DAS schools.
And this was a particular concern with students with disabilities.
So, and we agree that that could possibly be an unintended consequence and we don't want that to happen.
So, we will be monitoring the enrollment of DAS schools annually to determine if there is an increase in enrollment.
We'll probably be looking at a 10% difference.
Now, for some of these schools, one student will make up a 10% difference.
And so, we'll probably put them to the side and look at those where you have higher rates.
And if there is a problem identified, we will just have to develop some business rules.
So, I mean, possibly one of the business rules we could develop is to say, OK, any student that transfers to a DAS school in the year and they're going to be attributed to the DAS school's graduation rate, but we're also going to send them back.
to the high school.
So those students that got a GED or a Certificate of Completion would not be counted as a graduate back at their original high school.
That's one option.
We're not ready to go there yet, but we know that this is a concern, so we want to think about that for the future.
And with that, we can open this segment up to questions before closing out the entire item.
Okay.
Board member questions on this item?
Waiting, I'll... Yes.
Any consideration of fifth year graduation rates?
Several people... That's in our work plan.
It is in our work plan.
You know, this fifth year is not... It's not the end of the world that you graduate in five years, so it should be recognized.
So, we actually had a conversation with our TDG at the last meeting about an appropriate methodology for incorporating a fifth year graduation rate into the dashboard for our non-GAS schools.
So, we are working on that and hopefully we will bring that back to you.
I think it's in our work plan for September.
With an August memo.
Okay, good.
Board Member Valdez.
So we look at disproportionality and different things, and we know that with special ed students, we have a high number of suspensions.
And so in a district where you have a situation occur where it's you're going forward with an expulsion, let's say, they end up at a DAS school if a district has that kind of continuation school in their district.
So the business rules, how is that going to be impacted?
Because I kind of feel like I know there's a big concern out there in terms of
that this is going to happen, that districts are going to understand that at a comprehensive high school, if you have a lot of certificates of completion from SPED, they're going to count against you at a high school level, so it's better to move them over.
And so within that 10%, I'm just wondering why we don't do the business rules starting out as opposed for them, districts possibly trying to figure out how to move students over.
Does that make sense what I'm saying?
So to be clear, starting out as opposed to reacting if it happens,
the probability of it happening is going to be high, but then there are going to be situations where it is valid that the student needed to be moved off the campus and needed an alternative placement.
So keep in mind that we are going to be doing this for the first time with the 2018 dashboard on data that we already have.
Right?
We can start looking at enrollment, changes in enrollment starting next year.
And so I hope that this is not the case.
But if it is the case that we see a lot of students being moved to DAS schools, we will have time to incorporate our business rules for the 2019 dashboard.
Any other board discussion?
If not, we're ready for public comment.
Sorry, there's one last slide.
That was supposed to be taken off.
All right, that's an old version.
All right, so the last piece was just to give you an update on the actual dashboard itself and where we are headed with it for fall as a look and feel.
I wanted to make sure that in attachment three, you may have seen there was several
presentations before the legislature on the dashboard, whether it's through a budget committee process or the policy committee process, the legislature is watching the development of the dashboard.
And I think they have been very supportive in both committees on the governor's proposal to include $300,000 to improve the user interface, the look and feel of the dashboard.
So with that spirit in mind, we have been working very closely, collaboratively with state board staff and talking to stakeholders about what they want to see in a new look and feel for the dashboard.
And we've been working with our contractor as well because we have a very truncated timeframe to get this turned around for them to actually then develop the new look and feel because it's a design piece that we would be contracting out for.
So we are all hands on deck for this, and we are hoping to be able to meet the time frames which we've established, which the private preview of the dashboard would open up in early November.
So we really have to have something done prior to that.
I have mentioned throughout this presentation, prior to our July meeting, we will have several very targeted stakeholder meetings, and we're gonna talk, depending again on
on your vote today with the growth model and make sure that we cover the aspects that you've asked us to cover in those stakeholder meetings, too, and ask them those same questions that you're asking us.
So with that, I would like to turn it over back to you, President Kirst.
So we're ready for public comment.
Go ahead.
Will the following people please line up?
Doug McRae, Michael McCormick, Liz Gulen, Julie White, Andrea Ball, Martha Alvarez, Linda Kaminsky, Daniel Espinosa, Jill Grace, Will Valentine, Jessica Salko, Janet Porter, Jane Steinkamp, Stephen Blake, Brian Rivas,
Leticia Garcia, Ernie Silva, Samantha Tran, Lucero Garcia, Gilda Cruces, Maribel Cruces.
Good afternoon, I'm Doug McRae, retired educational measurements specialist from Monterey.
I also had a favorite teacher at San Benancio Middle School in Salinas.
The recommended residual gains method is problematic due to the lack of stability of regression estimates over time, as pointed out by Bob Lynn some 25 years ago.
So there are good reasons not to place all your bets for a California growth model on a residual gains method.
At the least, the board should ask CDE staff to replicate ETS simulation study using 2017 Smarter Balanced data.
I'd also think it would be worthwhile to ask CDE staff to replicate the distance to MET model, which I don't think the discussion this morning
It was totally, totally accurate.
I'd like to note the current assessment program has problems with consistency of cross-sectional gain scores from year to year, and it would be double trouble to adopt a growth measure also having stability over time.
The concerns were also noted at the CPAG meeting a couple of weeks ago, as well as in letters submitted by children now for this meeting.
Thank you.
Yeah, good afternoon.
Michael McCormick, Superintendent of the Val Verde and Clyde School District, President Kirst, Deputy Superintendent Glenn Price.
Just sitting in the audience, my comments are around the growth models that are proposed.
And I really appreciate the board's deep thought and perspective.
As somebody who's kind of here from the field, I'm walking away from the conversation saying to myself, OK,
Is this a value add for us?
And what does that predictive algorithm look like in the residual gain model?
And how are there ways that CDE staff can help explain the value of that for us in the field?
And what does that look like?
Certainly, it gives us another window to look at student groups' growth over time, which I think can be valuable.
But I think the danger is that it does add another element of potential time difficulty or just, you know, it's another piece there in there and is that layer value added.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, President Kirst and members of the board.
I'm Julie White from the Core Districts.
We appreciate your consideration of a growth model and all of the discussion today.
The Core Districts have been using a residual gain growth model for several years, and we continue to share our learning.
I want to call your attention to a recent analysis on residual gain growth models that takes a look at the control variables that Dr. Kirst mentioned and Cindy and Jenny had talked about.
It shows that while controlling for student prior achievement is the most important consideration, it does not level the playing field
for schools that serve large numbers of low-income students.
To shed light on how LCFF is working, we believe this is an important consideration for the board.
Again, we urge the state to move forward with a growth model and we look forward to participating in the detailed discussions in the coming months.
Good afternoon.
Martha Albers on behalf of ACSA the Association of California School Administrators.
First we support the one year graduation for the Dallas schools.
Regarding the student growth model we provided several questions in our letter to the state board.
Specifically we would like to see more information that the TDG considers regarding external factors that should be incorporated into a student growth model, student demographics or other characteristics that could make an impact in that evaluation.
We also want the TDG to explore whether we need more data as fact assessment information with multiple years of growth data cycles before we determine which would be the best model to use in our accountability system.
And lastly, one of the other, of the six questions we provided is how would this be incorporated into the accountability system?
We have an academic indicator that will also be modified to include a 95% participation rate, and so we should be looking at these issues together instead of isolation.
Thank you.
Good afternoon.
I'm Ernie Silva.
I work for a drop, as you know.
I work for a dropout recovery high school, and I want to encourage your approval of the one-year grad rate.
I want to thank Jenny, Cindy, and all of Carrick's team, and I want to thank Dr. Velasco and the Gardner Center for all the work that they've been doing with us and including our voices in this discussion.
I want you to know that the department is asking you to be on the cutting edge, not the bleeding edge.
Chicago, Portland, and Ohio have already
adopted one-year graduation rates.
When you think about particularly schools like mine, even the fifth or sixth year rate doesn't reach our population of students who have been out of school for one or two years, who are five years below grade level, who have at least eight or more ACES.
They're students that have a lot of challenges.
And giving us the opportunity to demonstrate their success
to our staff, to the students themselves, and the state at large is really important.
We appreciate the opportunity to do just that.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Andrea Balfe on behalf of the California School Boards Association.
I just want to highlight two points from our letter.
We do support the recommendation to explore the residual growth, the residual gain growth model.
We just think this is added information as your really thorough discussion pointed out and will help highlight effective practices at schools.
Second, we support the recommendation from various groups to add a placeholder in the dashboard for the California Science Assessment, and you'll hear more from the people that really know about this, the science teachers.
Finally, I just want to say, Dr. Kirst, we're going to miss you.
You've played a critical role.
In the LCFF, you heard earlier about the seismic shift and the impact to board members.
We've been working on this since its inception, and your leadership and continued support for local control has been really valuable, so thank you.
President Kirst, I'm Brian Rebus speaking on behalf of the Education Trust West.
We would like to urge you to continue the work on measuring growth and we agree with the staff recommended methodology on residual gain and I would just ask you to
To note that to close opportunity and achievement gaps, we need accelerated growth for low-income students and students of color.
So we need to measure how much they're growing, but also the rate at which they're growing.
So it's important for equity that you continue that work.
We agree with the staff recommendation on the one-year graduation rate for alternative schools.
And we also agree with the request that you adopt a placeholder for science assessments.
We think that's incredibly important, and particularly important for measuring college and career readiness.
Thank you.
Buenas tardes.
Mi nombre es Maribel Correas.
Soy padre del programa LIDER-GO de Public School West Contra Costa.
Hello, my name is Maribel Correas and I'm a parent of Go Public Schools West Contra Costa.
Durante los ltimos 18 meses, hemos estado dirigiendo una campaa titulada Data in Actions.
El objetivo es asegurar que los datos se usen desde el aula hasta la junta de educacin.
A travs de esta campaa, nos familiarizamos con el California School Dashboard.
Esta herramienta tiene mucha informacin, pero para los educadores y la comunidad.
Sin embargo, como padres, no podemos decir que esta herramienta nos ayuda.
In the past 18 months, I along with fellow parents have been leading a campaign called titled Data in Action.
The goal of this campaign is for data to be used from the classroom to the boardroom dais and everywhere in between to inform decision making.
Through this campaign, we became familiar with the California School Dashboard.
While this tool has a lot of information about what is happening in our schools, it is not enough and it does not accomplish the goal of informing parents.
The fact that one color code can mean various performance levels is just one example of how this tool does not actually help identify a quality school or help me advocate for my children's education.
La herramienta no est disponible en otros idiomas y esto es frustrante.
El 20% de los estudiantes de las escuelas pblicas de California son aprendices de ingls.
Un botn de Google Translate no es suficiente.
La informacin no se traduce efectivamente.
Nuestra meta es apoyar a nuestros hijos con educacin y el nuevo tablero es otra barrera para la participacin de nosotros como padres.
Gracias.
Additionally, the fact that this tool is not available in languages other than English is particularly frustrating.
20% of California's public school students are English language learners.
A Google Translate button is not efficient in translation and doesn't accurate efficiently.
Instead of creating an open door to information, the new dashboard is yet another barrier to inauthentic parent engagement.
Hola, mi nombre es Erika Cruces y tambin soy un padre lder.
El pasado 17 de marzo, el Departamento de Educacin de California se reuni con ms de 800 personas en 20 diferentes eventos presenciales sobre School Dashboard de California.
Pero solo uno de estos eventos estaba dirigido para los padres y en ese evento solo cont con 12 asistentes.
Hello, my name is Erika Cruz, and I am an alumna of the Go Public Schools Wens Contra Costa Parent Leadership Program.
According to Attachment 3 on this agenda item, the California Department of Education staff met with more than 800 people at 20 different in-person events since March 17th about the California School Dashboard.
But only one of these events was targeted at parents, and they only had 12 attendees.
Con demasiada frecuencia, las familias de los estudiantes de ingls y de los estudiantes de bajos ingresos son ignorados e excluidos de las decisiones claves.
Somos una de las audiencias ms importantes para lo que podra y debera ser una herramienta muy poderosa para las familias de todo California.
Esperamos que soliciten nuestros comentarios y perspectivas.
Too frequently, families of English learners and low-income students are overlooked and excluded from key decisions.
We are some of the most important audiences for what could and should be a very powerful tool for families across California.
We hope you will seek out our feedback and perspective.
Estamos aqu para asegurar que los tableros escolares funcionen para todas las familias de California.
Entendemos que el presupuesto del gobernador reserva $300,000 para mejorar solo el tablero durante el prximo ao.
Pedimos que una de las prioridades claves incluyan comentarios de familias diversas y el acceso de alta calidad en diferentes idiomas.
We are here to ask you to prioritize making the California school dashboards work for families like mine and so many others in my community.
We understand that the governor's budget sets aside $300,000 to improve the dashboard over this next year.
We ask that a key priority include diverse family feedback and high quality language access.
Thank you.
Hello my name is Lucero Garcia and I'm a parent leader.
I am proud to share with you a tool developed by GO Public Schools West Contra Costa for all members of my community.
It is a bilingual student data report that reports the current status of student performance and why it matters.
I have used this tool to talk with other parents and educators to work together to change things for our children.
One page in particular stands out to me.
On page 37 we see that in our district out of 537 8th graders who are English learners only 8 are meeting standards in math.
Let me say that again.
Out of five hundred and thirty seven only eight are meeting standards.
Too many children are left behind and excluded from life opportunity and success.
This is why all families must have full access to school performance and data and be engaged in the development of these tools.
How can we offer our children the best future possible without meaningful data.
We ask for your support and partnership.
We are prepared to do everything we can and we ask for you to do the same.
Thank you so much.
Good afternoon.
Leticia Garcia here on behalf of the Riverside County Superintendent of Schools in support of the one-year graduation rate.
We believe that this methodology is the only way to equitably account for the graduation of students in DOS schools.
It also recognizes the merits of these programs and as well as celebrates the accomplishments of students in alternative schools.
Thank you.
Good afternoon.
Daniel Spinoza from the Learning Policy Institute.
We thank the board and staff for your commitment to continuous improvement within California's accountability system as evidenced by the improvements that you're taking up today.
We think the proposed one-year graduation rate indicator for alternative schools is a reasonable one.
We note, though, that how California handles accountability for these schools really matters and
carries major equity concerns, as these schools enroll about 13% of California's high school seniors, and they enroll significantly higher percentages of black, Latinx, English learner, and foster youth than the state's traditional high schools.
We hope that the board will also explore other accountability measures that are targeted to these schools.
However, just as important is that California's evolving accountability system should incentivize regular schools to keep and graduate their students, including those with greater academic needs.
And for that reason, we appreciate the board and the staff's commitment to returning to the five-year graduation rate in September.
And finally, we support the proposed next steps on the student growth model.
We note, though, that the specifics for how the residual gain model are calculated really matter, and we urge you to continue to work with technical experts to refine the model so as to control for student and school effects.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, President Kurst, members of the board, and pseudo-Torlikson.
I'm Jill Grace.
I am president of the California Science Teachers Association, and I'm here to ask you to add a placeholder for CAS on the 2018 fall dashboard.
The reasons are outlined in the joint letter that was submitted for the item by over 300 organizations, and we're distributing you a revised copy right now.
CSTA members are in the trenches every day, competing against old yet still existing paradigms that prioritize ELA and math over all other subjects, especially in elementary and in under-resourced schools, and for EL Latino, African American, and low SES students.
For many, investment in NGSS-related teacher PD and other supports in district LCAPs is still significantly less than what is required to support effective implementation.
The recent PPIC survey on NGSS confirms that implementation is uneven across the state and concluded that the state must do more to make science a priority.
you have taken numerous actions demonstrating support for high quality science education for all kids.
Despite this, implementation at the local level still lags.
Reasons are many, but one sided with increasing and disturbing frequency is the claim that because science is not currently identified as an indicator of academic performance on the dashboard, that it's neither viewed as a priority for the state nor a measure of accountability with regard to student access and performance in science.
This has profound effects on equitable access to science for all students.
We know that a high quality NGSS instruction is essential for every student and has the highest potential for improving outcomes for underserved kids and narrowing achievement gaps.
It promotes critical thinking and leads to deeper understanding and improved outcomes across other core subjects.
It can also remove barriers to learning for all kids, encouraging their innate curiosity and making education more relevant to their lives.
According to the second evaluation report of the Early Implementation Initiative, the instructional shifts called for in the NGSS have a profound effect on increasing student engagement, leading more students, including some of whom who've never raised their hands before, to go ahead and raise their hands and participate.
The National Academy of Sciences reports that such engagement is critical for learning now, but also may be linked to later education career choices.
But this only happens if science education is adequately prioritized and supported at all levels.
We've invested a great deal to make the dashboard a tool for stakeholders to use as a starting place to evaluate, reflect on practice, and inform LCAPs.
And we've heard in the presentation earlier today that districts use it.
And that's why it's so critical to include a placeholder for science, like the ones that currently exist for chronic absenteeism and college and career indicators.
including a placeholder for science, allows it to be used for the purpose with which it was intended.
I respectfully ask that you approve adding this placeholder on the 2018 fall dashboard.
And shout out to all teachers.
One day just isn't enough to celebrate all that you do.
Had to get in on that.
So thank you very much.
Good afternoon, President Kirsten, members.
I'm Stephen Blake, representing the California STEM Network, which brings together leaders and stakeholders from business, higher education, K-12, community-based organizations, and many, and philanthropy and many other organizations to foster innovation and help scale up effective STEM instruction for all kids.
On behalf of the statewide and the regional STEM networks, we're asking, as the last witness did,
that you add a placeholder on the 2018 dashboard for the cast for all the reasons that are described in the letter that we were a part of and that your prior witness described.
Several hundred organizations came together in just a matter of days to sign on to this letter because, like you, we have seen the potential and the strength of NGSS-based instruction.
We want to ensure that reaches every child.
And so many of us that are signed onto that letter have seen evidence that many educational leaders are taking their cues from what exists on the dashboard as they establish their priorities and their budgeting with so many pressures on them.
And so at this time, I ask that you add this in time for the 2018 dashboard.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Samantha Tran with Children Now.
I want to echo the sentiments of the prior speakers regarding the placeholder on the dashboard.
Children Now is in support of that movement.
In addition, for the organization, we're really supportive of the two actions that are before the board in terms of moving forward with the residual growth model and the one-year graduation rate for alternative ed.
With respect to growth, one of the reasons why we've been so supportive of moving in that direction is because it is one of the best indicators of continuous improvement at the local level.
It really levels the playing field and doesn't, you know, typical assessment scores, as we know, unfortunately, have very strong correlations to demographics.
and a growth model really shows where there's real positive things happening on behalf of kids and their outcomes at the local level.
In addition, with respect to alternative ed, we really appreciate the department and the board's commitment to including alternative ed in LEA dashboard ratings.
We think that's an important movement.
We would also encourage, per board member Valdez's point, to explore the school level dynamics sooner rather than later.
Thank you very much.
Good afternoon, Sarah Lillis, Executive Director of Teach Plus California.
I first want to echo the support for the placeholder on the dashboard for the science assessment.
I also want to echo the physical manifestation of the prospect of adopting a growth model that board member Sun had, having had been waiting, involved in this conversation for about a decade.
I'm really excited.
personally and as an institution, because I think there is a very clear value.
And as Ms.
Tran talked about, it really is about, it's a better measure for looking at student learning and student growth.
And it really helps us get at these issues of inequity and closing gaps, as both Children Now and Ed Trust West talked about.
And I think in this paradigm shift,
And I know these are conversations for down the line.
But in the paradigm shift where our accountability system is about support and assistance, I think if we're talking about this as a tool for continuous improvement locally, it is also a tool to be included on the dashboard in our accountability system, which is now about identifying LEAs for assistance.
And so if we're able to really isolate looking at student learning, it's a critically important measure.
And we support the adoption.
Good afternoon, President Kurst, members of the board.
I'm Dean Drescher on behalf of EdVoice.
As a former student and a former teacher, I too am also grateful for all the hard work of teachers.
We support the further exploration of the residual gain model and echo board member Sun your interest in the model being used to further highlight gaps in equity.
And as my colleagues at Children Now and the Education Trust West also mentioned, in order to close equity gaps, we need accelerated growth.
And we think that this model can be really useful.
And I'm looking forward to the further exploration.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, board members.
John Affeld from Public Advocates and the Equity Coalition.
Yes, on a growth model, we think that is an important feature of a continuous improvement accountability system.
And I think it should be its own distinct indicator on the dashboard.
Also supportive of the one-year graduation rate in concept.
There still are some questions about its implementation in particular.
I appreciate the sensitivity to looking at business rules based on
any changes in how districts refer students to DAS schools.
In particular, adult ed is now coming off of our calculation of California's graduation rate and it's gonna have a two to 3% impact.
The department is anticipating and lowering our graduation rate.
That's gonna increase the incentive
potentially for Sundas schools to graduate.
So, I hope we keep our eye on that.
Thank you.
Eric Premack, Charter Schools Development Center.
We are very thankful.
We don't get to thank the bureaucrats very often, but they've done awesome work on this.
We've been working on this for
in the dog years on the one-year grad rate, I think it was, I can't remember how many years ago we started talking about this, so it's great to see this moving forward.
On the growth stuff, Board Member Valdez's question is so right on, why are we doing this?
And I think there are a whole bunch of reasons.
I think it's important to understand we're kind of at the late Stone Age on growth metrics.
We don't even know what growth is.
We don't know how to measure it.
But if we don't try something, we'll never figure it out.
And if for no other reason just to keep moving the ball forward on that and to remind folks that the change metric on the dashboard
doesn't really tell you very much.
That's really a value.
And it'd be really interesting to ask the same question about the change metric and the growth metric.
I hope ultimately we will figure out how to do it and we can sub it in on the dashboard.
Time.
Change metric, but it'll take a while to get there.
Thank you.
That continues, concludes the public testimony.
So I think we're ready now to discuss the CDE motion.
Board member Burr.
Well, I'm prepared to make a motion, but I do have one question.
I think it's on the one year graduation rate.
Jenny talked about the end size conversation.
And my understanding is the statute 52052 requires an end size of 30.
So I don't know if you want to talk about that or maybe Dave can address that.
But you sort of, you didn't gloss over it.
You were very specific about it.
But anyway, I just like to understand the difference there.
So, I'll answer the question.
Legally, the education code sets a minimum in size for purposes.
It's in education code section 52052.
That section is cross-referenced and incorporated into the evaluation rubrics.
Basically, the LCFF part of the law references that ed code section.
So, that's why the minimum in size on the dashboard has been 30 at the all student and student group level is based on that statute.
There's an exception for foster and homeless youth.
So that's been incorporated into the accountability system.
But essentially we've applied that 30 student in size consistently both at the LEA and school level based on state law education code.
So as I understand it then in this recommendation you're suggesting to move the in size, change it or?
We're asking that you approve the methodology.
You'll notice that the reference to an end size, a change in end size is not included.
And that was because of Dave's comments to us.
So that was left out.
I think that's a legal consideration.
It's something that the stakeholder feedback, you know, they want to get smaller because they want more students to be incorporated into this piece.
Because as we mentioned, some of these are very small schools.
So if we don't have a legal basis for it, we obviously can't move forward on it.
Thank you for the clarification.
If you're ready, I'm happy to move the department's recommendation.
I'll second it.
Okay, all those, any further debate?
All those in favor, raise your hands.
All right, the motion is passed.
And we are now on item three.
Do you want me to tell the guys in the room to not pull this up yet?
To pull it up after the, it's that one right there.
Right.
So, I'll just have you on screen until you leave.
Good afternoon.
Good afternoon, Michelle Center, Assessment Director.
Sorry, it's a little loud.
Item three before you is an information item.
It is going to highlight a lot of the key activities that are going on right now, and there are a lot of activities going on right now.
We are in full swing in terms of our assessments.
As part of this item, I will also be inviting Michael McCormick, superintendent of Val Verde, to also co-present with me and he'll be talking about his use of the digital library as well as the interim assessments in his district.
So let's first off by giving you a status update of current testing.
You may recall that our CASP annual testing window opened on January 9th.
And as of today, I can report that over 55% of students have completed their Smarter Balanced assessments.
About 50% of students have completed their alternate assessment.
And about 57% of students have completed their science assessment.
We also have an additional 2,000 students participate in the voluntary standards-based test in Spanish.
This will be the last administration of that test as we transition over to the California Spanish assessment.
Currently right now, the department is undergoing our annual quality control check that we do on scoring reporting.
We do this every single year.
We expect that we'll be done with that quality control check at the end of this week.
Once that happens, then the results start flowing out to our schools and districts and educators via our online reporting system within the normal two to three week timeline.
We're also currently having conversations with our contractor about how we may be able to speed up that quality control check next year so that we can try and get these out a little sooner in the school year.
I want to also remind you that public reporting of the results will happen in fall.
And that we, you'll see how I like to be over prepared here, we have built our assessment platform to be able to support a million concurrent users.
So people thought I was crazy.
But you know what?
You build it, maybe they'll come.
So last year, we had our peak.
It was May 9.
And we had about nearly half a million users on the system at one time.
And we were just fine.
And so we made sure to increase that so we had capacity of a million.
As we know, testing particularly of our interim assessments is really taking hold in California.
So we did that and yesterday we hit what might be our peak for this year at 571,000 concurrent users on the system.
And so we really need to thank ETS and AIR for supporting us and hitting that milestone
without technology issues that you see happening in other states.
So appreciate their partnership.
And really, I know it's hard sometimes when you're not in the paper because of these issues to recognize the good things that we're doing because you see the news about the bad things that might be happening in other states like Tennessee.
So, I just, you know, this is an opportunity for us to recognize ourselves and give us a little pat on the back and appreciate the partners that help us do that.
So, now I'd like to take a little bit of an opportunity to share with you the latest activities related to our science test, or our CAST as we refer to it.
First, I'd like to start off with the CAST Academies.
So the CAST Academies are those full-day trainings that I've mentioned to you before.
In those trainings, we talk about the design of our CAST test and the expectations of students on that test.
We deconstruct a California Next Generation Science performance expectation.
We really dive deep into that and deconstruct the dimensionality of that performance expectation.
We also take time to explore the CAST training tests that are available online and really look at those from the lens of how that might influence what is going on in our California classrooms and how we could use those examples on there to improve teaching and learning in California.
So, this year we had three locations of that training.
We were in Sacramento, Fresno, and Irvine.
We also had virtual classroom options for all of those trainings.
So, we were able to train at least 1,200 educators with that opportunity.
So, that was
I would say amazing.
We were a little nervous about exploring this new option of having these virtual classrooms, but we have received some positive feedback about those that were online and they appreciated the opportunity to participate even though we couldn't have everyone there in person.
I should also acknowledge
ETS and respect that at one point in time I had about 750 educators on a waitlist to participate in this training and They went above and beyond the requirements of their contract to make sure that we could get all of those people online and trained and so we did not have anyone on a waitlist for those cast academies
We also are gonna conduct another version of those, a train-the-trainer version that is specific to our county offices of education, and that will occur in June of this year.
So we hope that they will train additional educators that we were not able to in our capacity here at the department.
So also want to recognize the work that we're undergoing to prepare for the operational cast.
We are developing quite a few items right now.
ETS has held a series of item review meetings in preparation for that operational test.
They had meetings in February, March, and April of this year, both in person as well as virtual meetings with about 60 California educators that review and provide recommendations on all of our newly developed items.
I also want to take an opportunity to acknowledge and appreciate my staff, Alex Moos, Laura Walls, and Mike Torres.
We are undergoing a massive amounts of reviews of these items.
Every single item that you see on a California test has also been reviewed by someone here in the department.
And they don't get out of their cubicle very often right now as we have hundreds of items that we are reviewing.
And lucky for me, I've been able to recruit some great California science teachers to help with that.
So I want to also talk about the resources that we recently added about talking about the CAST field test results to LEAs.
So we did build a toolkit.
I think I mentioned this last time I was here.
Doing so, we recognize that the build out of these science tests as well as the implementation of our standards is going to take time and we are in a transition period right now.
You can see it on the faces when you attend these trainings with a room full of science teachers that were in that transition period.
And we wanted to make sure that we provided resources to our districts to help communicate about the standards in this transition to the new assessment, particularly given the release of preliminary indicators on this field test, which we originally had not planned on doing.
So we have done that, we have posted that on our website, and the toolkit includes information such as background information on our test, a description of these preliminary indicators that will be reported on our field test, key messages for LEAs to use when they communicate about these, key messages such as patience and persistence,
A timeline for reporting of the results, including when we transition from preliminary indicators to scale scores and achievement levels.
A description of that transition process in more detail related also to our alternate assessment.
We have also developed a detailed FAQ that can be used with schools, stakeholders, and districts.
And finally, an optional letter template is provided to our districts if they choose to use it in terms of how they report information to parents.
So in building out this toolkit, I have had a massive amount of support.
And so I'd like to acknowledge all the stakeholders that reviewed these different articles for me and provided us feedback.
They included the California Teachers Association,
the California Science Teachers Association, the Association of California School Administrators, the California PTA, the California School Boards Association, the California Charter Schools Association, CABE, SESESA, Californians Together, and the Regional Assessment Network members.
All of these groups had representatives that assisted me and they keep picking up the phone every time I call and say, will you review something?
And they graciously agree to do so and provide us feedback.
And we do the best that we can in terms of incorporating the feedback that we have.
We think about the partners.
that we have in terms of rolling out the science test and the collaboration between the department and the stakeholders is critical as we think about this large transition to very complex science standards.
In terms of our alternate assessment for science, the items for those are what we call our clusters, if you will, of items, our embedded performance tasks.
And these are for our students with the most significant cognitive disabilities.
And we continue to improve upon that test.
You might recall that we had two years of a pilot for that and we have needed those two years and we have made improvements every single year in that process.
This month ETS will be meeting with California educators who are experienced with the student population and teaching them science and they will be reviewing additional performance tasks in preparation for the 2019 field test.
So we constantly collect feedback, not only on our science tests, but all of our tests.
We collect feedback from schools, from districts, from educators, as well as from parents.
And we do this in the form of surveys, focus groups, stakeholder meetings.
I'm constantly getting feedback.
And we use that to make improvements on our system.
And I think that the California Alternate Assessment for Science is a good example of the changes that you've seen that we have made based on feedback that we have received.
Next, I'm excited about the work that we're going to do to transition our student reporting to the 21st century by phasing out parent paper reports and replacing them with accessible electronic reports.
And I think back to the time when we were transitioning our assessments from paper to computer and how nervous we were, and we're probably nervous about this transition also.
But luckily, we have partners as we go about this transition.
The goals of this transition that would take our paper parent reports to electronic versions of those parent reports is starting this year with a pilot to
First, we have the goals of the pilot, let's talk about those.
It is to transition a small group of LEAs from the distribution of paper to electronic reporting this year.
Second, the pilot is going to look at the connectivity of the student information systems used by those districts and the cloud where we store our student score reports.
Third, we're going to take this opportunity to really look at the potential barriers that we have to transitioning to electronic reporting.
And finally, to inform us on best practices that were observed in that transition of these pilot districts.
So in terms of the pilot this year, we have four student information systems represented in our pilot.
We have two vendors, ARIES and Infinite Campus.
Those vendors are not including all of the school districts that have their products.
As you can imagine, that would be many millions of school districts.
But instead, they have five districts, including a small school district that is included in that.
We also have two locally developed student information systems represented in the pilot.
We have LA Unified and El Monte Union High.
So we have a variety of, let's see, technology preparedness and sizes in terms of the districts that are represented in the pilot.
And so we hope that that will be a great test of how we can make this work.
Next, I hope at our next meeting I'll be able to invite one of the SIS vendors in collaboration with one of the LEAs that participated in the pilot to share with you all their experience and hopefully do a demonstration of how they were able to deliver those reports to parents.
Lastly, I'd like to share with you the important work that we are conducting to support the use of interim assessments and the digital library throughout California.
So far this year, more than 8.4 million, should I say that again, 8.4 million Smarter Balanced interim assessments have been administered across more than 1,500 LEAs.
OK, so let that sink in.
OK.
I'm also very happy to report that the vast majority of those were the interim assessment blocks, or the IABs as we refer to them.
So remember, those are chunks that can be administered in what we hope to be one single class period of time.
So Smarter Balanced, in conjunction with very strong leadership from California, continues to make improvements on the interims to make them more useful for improving teaching and learning.
I think that you.
you know, maybe get tired of me, but I like change.
We like to improve every single time.
And so we have been championing that change.
Part of that was the new reporting system, which you've heard me talk about, where we have ensured that the number one recommendation from California educators was included.
And that was they wanted to be able to see student results on those interims.
They want to go in and see how they responded to each and every item.
And so we have done that.
I think another reason why we have 8.4 million is not only that great reporting system, which we hear positive comments about all the time, but also the quality professional development that is done under the leadership of my division.
We have, with our contractors ETS and the Sacramento County Office of Education, we've presented at over two dozen workshops and conferences throughout California this year.
These workshops and presentations inform educators about the resources that are available to them in terms of interim assessments in the digital library.
Again, we continue to recognize that there's always room for improvement.
Therefore, we're asking the consortium to offer a reporting system demonstration site that will include data that will make it easier for our county districts and schools to train their educators locally.
So that is on the to-do list for the consortium and they are happy to do that for us.
We have also heard from educators that they want the IABs to assess a smaller set of skills, a smaller chunk of knowledge, if you will, to ensure that the information they get back is actionable at the classroom level.
So at the recommendation of California, as well as other member states, Smarter Balanced has started the work of looking at developing what we will refer to as focused IABs that will have smaller sets of skills in them to be assessed.
So finally, you know, you've heard me talk about Connections Playlist before.
I do want to just reinforce that the Connections Playlist, those are the instruments that really have the connection between the interim assessments and what's in the digital library.
That connection playlist is now available in the new reporting system.
So they don't have to go somewhere separate.
Right there, when they look at someone's student results, they can click on that and get directly over to the digital library and the recommended instructional resource.
Let's see.
So, that is all I was going to share.
Now, I was going to invite up Val Verde Unified to share their local experience.
So, here today is Michael McCormick, superintendent, as well as instructional coaches Heather Campbell and Christina Ancasawan.
Wow.
Yeah, that was awesome.
Well, we're delighted to be here.
President Kirst, thank you.
Superintendent Torickson, rest of the board.
We're on a field trip.
And so, this is really cool.
So I hope that you have this little card in front of you just to provide a little context on Val Verde.
We're about 20,000 students.
We're located in the Inland Empire in Riverside County.
And our student breakdown is 82% of our students are qualifying for the National School Lunch Program.
About 74% of our students are Hispanic, 15% African American.
About a quarter of our students are English learners.
And if you look at the other side of the card there, I'm happy to report that our number of California Distinguished Schools has risen from five to seven.
Very excited to have two additional schools.
And we're here to share our experience about using what we like to call the second generation IABs.
Those are our interim assessment blocks.
And we think that they're an awesome free resource.
And you really don't want to hear from me.
And so it's my honor to present the real talent, which is here are two teachers from Val Verdean Applied School District.
You're going to start with Heather Campbell, and then you'll hear from Tina on CASA 1.
So I'm going to turn it over to Heather.
All right, thank you for allowing us to come and speak with you today.
I'm just going to go ahead and start with the who, the people that were involved and helped us get to where we are with the IABs.
So it started really with our accountability director at the district.
She held multiple trainings with principals and instructional coaches, kept us very informed.
And we were able to take that back to our school site with our administrator and then provide training for our teachers.
And we met with teacher teams and kind of showed them how to use the IABs.
And of course, then teachers took that knowledge back into the classroom, and students were exposed.
And they had the value of seeing what the item types and the questions look like.
So those were just some of the key players that helped organically bring this process about at our school site.
Okay, thank you.
Before we even get into the IABs, I wanted to share a piece of our story that's very important, and that is the access to the training test.
The training test provides various item types for our teachers and our students to be exposed to, so they're familiar with the technology and the formatting of the questions.
So then we get into what we call the IABs, and it provides another opportunity for the students to become exposed to more focused information on the claims and targets that are going to be assessed.
Now, the bottom line is we can teach these standards all day, every day.
And if we don't expose our students to the way they are being asked on the SBAC, then we're doing a disservice to our students.
Because we don't want our students to be graded on the technology piece.
We want them to be graded on the content.
So once we get that out of the way, then we can focus more on the instruction and using the IABs as a tool for instruction of content as well.
So we have been using the IABs with our students and our teachers.
And we have some different quotes, because what better than to hear it from the mouths of the teachers and the students?
So we have a teacher quote here that she said.
It was a third, fourth grade combination teacher.
And she said about the IABs, I find the IABs very useful, because although we teach and practice the standards throughout the year,
The IABs provide questions that are phrased in a way similar to the SBAC test.
In addition, I like to tell my scholars, practice like it's real, so when it's real, it will feel like practice.
And then below there, we have some student comments from third, fourth, and fifth graders, and particularly the one at the end from Miss Victoria.
She's a fifth grader.
She says, the IABs are like a practice test that helps our brain remember all the things we've learned about all year.
So just some direct quotes from
the users of the interim assessment blocks.
Okay.
Okay, so as mentioned earlier, these IABs weren't necessarily used as much last year, and all of a sudden there is an increase in the numbers of IABs that have been given, and there is a very good reason behind that.
Number one is that they definitely took feedback from the teachers and they gave the teachers exactly what they were asking for.
So to begin, let's start small.
This is how we started the IAB usage.
We started small.
Our administrators asked our teacher teams to go ahead and just start with one IAB.
Just one IAB and ELA.
one IAB in math just so that we can explain to the teachers the difference of the IABs and the data that is given this year.
Last year it was a little bit of a struggle because last year we didn't have that information.
So now we have tons of information on the item types for these IABs that we were able to share with the teachers.
We have information on
the student responses.
So now it's not just, you know, the students are taking this and we don't know what the students are answering.
Now we're getting the student responses.
We also get the information of the depth of knowledge for each of these questions.
There's an answer key that's provided, which wasn't provided in the past, which is a very useful tool.
And the teachers are able to use this information as a tool to have a whole class discussion on why they're answering what they're answering.
What did they get wrong?
Why do you think you got it wrong?
Was it a technology issue or was it a content issue?
And then we provide some time for the students to collaborate.
They use the viewing system.
They provide time for students to collaborate in solving these problems together.
And it's definitely making a huge difference in the confidence level of the students going into the testing, which they are in today.
Let me jump in there in just a second.
So we've kind of taken this approach of motivate, not mandate.
And so we've had a very kind of organic kind of uptake of the second generation of IEBs.
And as teachers are finding the value in the reporting, they can use the IEBs
more just embedded in the regular instructional cycle.
And I think there's a tremendous amount of value in that.
It's truly like embedded formative assessment.
And so kind of the result is we think something's working because we found out the other day that in Val Verde, our teachers have administered 36,530 IABs this year.
And part of the six.
Part of the reason we were successful with that many IABs was we have a system of time and support for our teachers to actually implement this.
And the system we're currently implementing in Val Verde is professional learning communities, or PLCs.
So we started that journey this year, which has been extremely helpful.
Teacher teams get together at a minimum of an hour a week to meet.
And they ask themselves four questions.
The first question being, what is it we want students to learn?
What is the essential standard?
How are we going to know they learned it?
That's the assessment piece.
And the IABs could play a role in that, along with other assessments.
The next question, how are we going to respond if the students don't learn it?
And that's where the intervention comes in in the RTI process.
And the fourth question, how are we going to respond if they already know it?
So that enrichment.
So through this process, teacher teams would come together and meet in the IABs with the version 2, the updated data.
They were really able to dig in and look at student responses to have some data to have conversations about the expectation and the rigor of the Common Core Standards.
You might be wondering, how do we figure out an hour a week for teachers to meet?
Our district does have a minimum day every Wednesday that provides teacher time in their classroom, but also time to meet.
In addition to that, I can just give you the two examples that both of our school sites use.
My personal school site, we have the K, 1st and 2nd grade teachers all meet for an hour while the principal holds a recognition assembly where he will go over PBIS strategies or student recognitions and then a second hour where the 3rd, 4th and 5th graders teachers meet, which frees teachers up.
They know their students are in good hands.
At Tina's school, at Triple Crown, they work with the city of Paris.
And the city of Paris has people come out that teaches the students gardening.
They even have a chef that comes there and does nutrition.
I believe every classroom at that school has
had an hour-long nutrition, as well as doing some structured play and that type of thing.
So we've had to be a little creative in the way we find that time.
But I can tell you the teachers value that time.
And without that, I don't know that they would be looking at the IAB data and having those conversations around what this tool provides.
I'll do it.
Whoops.
We can talk without the slide, right?
We practice, so we're ready to go.
Just want to share briefly one protocol we put in place, because again, coming back to the time issue for teachers.
We came up with a system for them to strategically look at the data.
With the new system, they're able to sort the questions by most missed.
So we have the teachers sort the questions most missed, and then they will go through them strategically and look at those student responses.
kind of come up with a plan of how they're going to fill those weaknesses in the instruction.
Go back into their classroom, do some more instruction, then administer the same IAB again.
The students can then look at their growth, and the teacher can determine if the practices they were using in their classroom
filled that weakness and helped those students learn that.
So there's just a little bit of a strategic protocol.
So they're not looking through every single question, analyzing every single answer.
We wanted to be very strategic in the time and the way we were looking at the results as well.
So just wanted to share that with you.
I just wanted to share one more thing.
I'm less nervous now.
Something that we do at our school site is we're an avid district.
So we are really huge on goal setting and we want our students to be able to set their own goals.
So what we do is we use the summative assessment information from the previous year and the distance from three and then the teachers one-on-one have goal setting conferences with their students.
Once that takes, and they talk about the conversations, what do you need to do to be successful on this test?
And what do I need to do to help you be successful?
What can your parents do?
And then after that conversation takes place, my administrator, my assistant principal, and my principal, we meet with every single student, testing student in third through fifth grade, and we talk about those goals.
Now, we had this same process last year, and last year, because the IABs didn't give us that valuable information, the students went into testing feeling extremely, extremely nervous.
Now, they've worked very hard all year, as did their teachers, but then test day comes and it was a huge stressor.
Now, the conversations this year, I'm very pleased to share.
Because of this tool, access to this tool, our students are feeling extremely confident.
They're actually excited.
They're ready to celebrate their knowledge and beat this thing.
So I just wanted to share that with you.
So I think just in closing, one of the guiding kind of researchers that we pay attention to in Val Verde has been Michael Follin and the work around coherence and having a strong internal accountability system.
And so we've had a strong internal accountability system for probably 15 years now.
And one thing I'd like to say is that the IABs in their current form have really helped to strengthen our internal accountability system where students are regularly participating in kind of rigorous benchmark level formative assessments where teachers can then utilize that result
to help drive their instruction, have an instructional response that they come up with that's been just super valuable.
And so I think that that's it for us.
Thanks for listening.
We'll stay tuned.
So that is the entire update.
If there are questions for myself or the Val Verde team.
Board Member Strauss.
So, Superintendent McCormick and your teachers that came, thank you all so much for helping us see the practice that's connected to the policies that we establish.
And I think you're reinforcing like increased use of the IABs.
And I'm actually hearing a lot of districts that have been using benchmarks that teacher made or those purchased through
different vendors and that they're finding with the increased use of the IABs it's more aligned to the smarter balance and it is informing teacher practice and instruction and helping students get ready for more rigorous where sometimes they haven't fully transitioned to fully implementing the standards and it's helping the process as well.
But I think your presentation really
delve deeper into the steps that you took, how teachers are using the time collaboratively to work on it.
And I really think it helps inform the rollout and continued practice.
I just want to thank you all for your field trip today and for spending time.
And we're glad you're not nervous anymore in front of us.
We really, really do appreciate.
And I just thank CDE team for adding this to the presentation, because I think it adds a context that's very helpful in understanding the full implementation issues and rollouts for us.
Thank you.
Yeah, I just wanted to add that the IABs are really a step forward and we're not done improving them.
They have more evolution to go to be more robust and more useful for you in formative assessment.
So that's something we've been looking at, but I think it's a really
It's a while coming, you know, to get an interim assessment block, but I'm glad to hear it's being used the way you described.
I think we can get deeper, even deeper in the future with more formative data that will come out.
Board Member Valdez.
I want to thank you Cindy for, I'm sorry not Cindy, but Michelle, excuse me, and also Cindy for her day.
But in terms of really responding, so the teachers are saying we needed this to happen and you made it happen.
And so I think this is a real true collaboration and a relationship and having Val Verde friends here today.
I just really love that you're here and sharing your story and Mike with your leadership really
providing formative assessment because I'm really into we need leading indicators and you're using it that way and I think that's what's going to inform practice to get all students to have the opportunity to be successful.
So thank you.
Thank you.
There's no
motion or action on this, but we do have public comment, I'm sure.
Yes.
Board Member Sun, did you want to?
I just wanted to commend Michelle and your team.
It is amazing how the system has evolved and doing a wonderful job and all the way being responsive to stakeholders and people complaining and fixing it.
And so really, truly, it's really a testament to you and your staff and the hard work you have all done.
Thank you.
Board public comment well the following speakers to please line up Doug McRae and Mary Perry
Good afternoon.
I'm Doug McRae, a retired desk publisher.
I submitted brief observations on the seven status issues as well as four enhancement issues outlined in the agenda materials to your electronic folder last week.
I also mentioned a five-page policy brief on prospects for a ESSA-approved menu approach to high school statewide assessments.
An option worthy of further consideration that might well be preferable to the district option for using SAT or ACT per the legislation now active in the legislature for people that want that option.
I'd be happy to send you this brief for an individual student option for taking tests that are matched to instructional or curriculum pathways.
I'd be happy to send that to interested parties upon request.
Thank you.
Good afternoon.
I'm Mary Perry from California State PTA.
And as we just heard, parents will be receiving reports about their child's performance on the California Science Test.
And I am not telling you anything you don't know around the fact that implementation is still ongoing and in many, many districts has not really occurred yet.
It's an illogical sequence and it poses a serious challenge for those of us who work with parents to help sustain their trust in the system.
That's why we're really appreciative of the work that the Department of Education has done developing that toolkit.
They really have recognized the importance of this.
And in addition, I wanted to let the board know that the California State PTA is conducting research about what parents know about science, what they want to know, and what they need to know, as well as what questions arise.
Thank you.
Yeah, I just want to comment on the sequencing.
This is a result of our negotiations with the US Department of Education.
The Obama administration denied our waiver request to not give the old science test three times.
The Trump administration gave us that waiver.
but said, no more.
We have to identify, send something back to parents on science.
So this was not a plan we had or a sequence plan.
We're dealing with the federal government and this was the best deal we could get.
And we're appreciative of the department's approving our waiver to even get where we are today.
in this negotiation.
So, I wanted to clarify that.
We had a gun in our head.
Okay, we're ready for item four now.
The English Language Proficiency Assessments.
Okay, Michelle Center, assessment director.
The item four before you is an action item.
It relates to the initial English language proficiency assessment or LPAC of California used to identify students as English learners or initially fluent English proficient.
I'm happy to point out that this is the last action that you need to take before the initial LPAC goes fully operational July 1, 2018.
So maybe if we get action on this, they'll be like balloon drop or something.
So before the board today are two recommended actions.
The first is to approve the recommended weighting to calculate the overall score using the oral and the written composite scores.
The second is to approve the recommended preliminary threshold scores for the initial LPAC that is related to the overall scale score.
Both of these recommended actions you can find in attachment one of your board item.
So before we dive too deep, let's just do a recap of the hierarchy, which is action that you took previously related to the initial LPAC.
You can see from this diagram, I think the action was in September 2017, but you can see in this diagram that the base of the diagram are the four domains, the listening, speaking, reading, and writing.
Next above that are the composites of the oral and written.
They have a smaller number of items in this, particularly the initial LPAC.
So you'll see that these are reported in levels, not scores, the oral and the written.
At the top of this hierarchy is the overall scale score.
It is comprised of the oral language and the written language information.
And that scale score is the action that you will be taking today.
That overall scale score is the score that will be used to identify students as either EL or initially fluent.
The standard setting plan included methods used to make these recommended threshold scores was submitted to you all as an information memorandum in February of 2018.
I would like to thank member Feliza Ortiz-Lacon who's not here.
and Deputy Executive Director Patricia DeCos.
Both of them took time out to attend the standard setting meeting.
And though they're not here, I can let you know that Felisa did express that she
Patricia's here.
That is true.
Patricia's right here.
But Feliza did express to me, I'm sure Patricia meant to express this to me, that she found great value in attending the workshop and hearing the conversations that educators were having.
Yes, I know.
It was just right there on the tip of her tongue.
I also wanted to ensure that the public had ample opportunity.
And so what we did is what we provided, what you see before you in attachment one, we provided that as an information memorandum in April so that it would be posted for a longer time period that would allow them to digest that and report back to you today in public comment if need be.
So the next slides that I will go over are the recommendations from the superintendent.
These recommendations are based on that standard studying activity that are outlined in the information memorandum.
And once approved, they will take effect July 1, 2018.
Please note that the preliminary threshold scores you see before you today are not in any type of reporting scale score.
So these numbers that you see you may never see again because they will be transitioned to a different type of reporting scale.
To begin with, we're asking the board's approval for the composite weights for the initial.
In other words, how to weigh oral and written composites to calculate the overall scale score.
The table on this slide shows the different calculation options that were considered.
You can see we considered different options for kindergarten and grade 1, but really only the one option for grades 2 through 12.
The impact data that you also see in your board item that is an attachment three did use the superintendent's recommended option for the calculations.
The superintendent's recommended option is option one for the weighting of the overall scale score for kindergarten and grade one.
It was also considered by that same set of educators that we brought together to look at standard setting.
They also had agreement with option one as being the preferred waiting option.
That would mean that for kindergarten, the waiting would be oral composite at 90%, written composite at 10.
For grade one, we would have 70% oral and 30% written.
And then from grades two on, it would be a 50-50 waiting.
The preliminary threshold scores in Attachment 1 and in the tables on the next slide, they're all calculated using that Option 1 recommendation.
The CDE also requests the approval of the recommended preliminary threshold scores for the initial LPAC that you see here as well as in your Attachment 1.
These cut scores are for the six combinations of grades or grade spans.
The educator panel judgments are included in attachment two and then superintendent's recommendations do contain slight modifications to the panel judgments for kindergarten and grade two only.
The slight modifications were done to ensure that we had consistency across the grades or grade spans.
You should also note that the LPAC technical advisory group did agree with the preliminary threshold scores recommended by the superintendent.
I also want to remind you of a process that has been created for the correction of classification errors for this particular assessment.
For example, changing a student's classification from an English learner to that of an initially fluent English proficient.
This process will go into effect July 1, 2018 at the same time that these preliminary threshold scores would go into effect.
This process allows parents or educators to request a correction to a student classification at the LEA level.
This process occurs after an initial LPAC has been administered, but it must be done prior to the administration of a summative LPAC towards the end of the year.
This allows the district to consider additional pieces of information and evidence that might indicate that there was a classification error.
We know sometimes students are very shy at the beginning of the year.
And as they open up and warm up, you might realize that that was an error in terms of their classification.
And so this is a big step in the right direction in terms of allowing our districts to make that correction.
Also want to report out to you on next steps prior to you taking this action.
Let you know that in June, I will be providing you with an information memorandum.
It will include an update on LPAC activities.
It will also provide you with a copy of the initial LPAC student score report that we will be using.
In fall of 2018, we will be conducting a review of these initial LPAC preliminary threshold scores.
The purpose of that review is to determine if the CDE needs to consider modifications to the threshold scores.
So we will have that review as well as collecting information on
the use of that correction process that I described before that might indicate to us that there is a need for adjustments to the threshold scores.
So upon completion of that review, any adjustments, if necessary, would be brought to the board in May of 2019 so that they could be put into implementation in July of 2019.
And I hope that's it.
Thank you.
Yeah.
So this is, no, we need action here from... Yes, we do.
We do.
So you, could you cover the recommendation then?
Sure.
So the recommendation is to approve the LPAC weighting that's in attachment one, as well as approve the preliminary initial LPAC threshold scores that are in attachment one.
Okay.
Board members discussion to this item.
All right.
I guess we're ready for public comment.
Will Doug McRae please line up?
Good afternoon.
I'm Doug McRae, retired test publisher from NRA.
I've got no particular comment on the initial LPAC issues now on the table for reasons I addressed in the material I submitted to the electronic folder.
But I'm reminded of the problematic preliminary summative LPAC threshold scores approved by the State Board six months ago.
with a promise for a validation study to be conducted early this spring leading to verification or modification of those preliminary threshold scores next fall prior to release of LPAC 2018 results at the end of the calendar year.
I'd ask whether CDE staff has a status report on the data collection aspect of this validation study now that this aspect's been completed per the timeline provided in December.
And since I heard Michelle say things, I might guess my question is, will the info I'm asking for be in the June information memo update?
Thank you.
Okay, are we ready for a vote on the motion?
There is no motion.
Okay, I need a motion.
then I will make the motion.
Felice is not here.
So approve the initial LPAC weighting to calculate the overall score for oral and written language composites and to approve the preliminary initial LPAC threshold scores for the overall scale score.
All right.
All those in favor, raise your hands.
Okay, that carries.
And now we're into the waivers and the regular consent.
So we have had some changes in the waiver consent items for individual action.
So we will hear three waivers.
Waiver 1, waiver 2, and waiver 12.
Therefore, I'm asking for a motion on consent for Waiver 3 through Waiver 11 and Waiver 13.
Second.
Are there any public comments on these waivers, these consent waivers?
Andrea de Ramos.
Okay, evidently she's not here or not going to speak on this item.
So, I think we're ready now for a motion on this.
We have a motion.
Okay, all those in favor.
Okay, now we hear waiver one.
Andrea de Ramos.
Good afternoon board members, Lisa Constancia of the Charter Schools Division.
Waiver number one is a request by four local education agencies on behalf of six charter schools to waive portions of the California Code of Regulations Title 5 relating to the submission and action on determination of funding requests regarding non-classroom based instruction.
Each charter school identified in Attachment 1, and as I mentioned there are six, submitted a determination of funding request after the required deadline.
So if a charter school misses this deadline, they have to submit a waiver to the State Board before they can then turn around and submit a non-classroom based funding determination to the State Board.
The CDE recommends that the SBE approve the waiver submitted by the LEAs on behalf of these six schools in order to allow the specified charter schools to submit determinations of funding requested for the specific fiscal years.
Without the waiver, the state board may not consider the determination of funding requests and the charter schools non-classroom based ADA may not be funded for the affected fiscal year.
And I'm here, I'm available if you have any questions.
Any board discussion on this item?
No?
Public comment?
Angela DeRamos.
Okay, she knew which one.
Hi, this is Angela Duramos representing California Teachers Association and I'm speaking on item two in support of the... I'm sorry, W... Oh, waiver one to deny.
We're encouraging you to deny waiver one.
Thank you.
Any motion?
We need a motion on waiver one.
I move to approve CDE's recommendation on Waiver 1.
Further board discussion?
All in favor, raise your hands.
Okay, that's carried.
Okay, now we're dealing with Waiver 2.
Good afternoon.
I'm Karen Moore, the director of the School Fiscal Services Division.
I'm here to speak to waiver number two.
This is a request by San Diego Unified School District on behalf of the San Diego Cooperative Charter School to waive portions of Education Code section 47652, which provides advanced LCFF or local control funding formula funding for new and expanding charter schools.
There are two related charter schools in San Diego County, San Diego Cooperative and San Diego Cooperative 2.
San Diego Cooperative 2 is planning to close at the end of the year and the students would merge into San Diego Cooperative Charter School.
Based on the latest information available to us at this time, San Diego Cooperative Charter School has about 450 units of average daily attendance.
San Diego Cooperative, too, has about 290.
So just to give you some context there.
In order to explain the purpose of Section 47652, I think it might be helpful to take just a tiny bird walk and explain how funding works and what that code section is intended to provide.
So currently, all LEAs, including charter schools, school districts, and county offices of education receive LCFF funding through the principal apportionment.
The principal apportionment is certified three times a year.
It's certified at the advance apportionment in July, at the first principal apportionment in February, and again in June at the second principal apportionment.
And then these based on these three certifications, the payments are made to LEAs monthly throughout the course of the year.
The advance apportionment is the mechanism that we use to provide LCFF funding for July through January, and this is based on prior year data.
So we have not yet received any information for the current year.
All we have is what happened last year, and we advance funding based on that.
So that works fine for continuing schools, but schools that don't have any prior year data, they're new this year, there's no mechanism to fund them.
So 47652 provides a mechanism whereby it requires the CDE to advance funding for new charter schools based on estimates of attendance and enrollment.
And then that's what we provide through January until we have actual data for them.
The new charter advance apportionment is something that's done completely outside of the regular principal apportionment process.
It's kind of a manual process that we do to accommodate these new schools.
So 47652 was initially only intended to provide funding for new schools, but the section was amended in 2006 to provide funding for expanding charter schools.
It was amended by, excuse me, I'm trying to make sure I catch all my notes.
It was amended by section, by Senate Bill 604.
And it, the law currently allows funding for expanding charter schools that are adding a grade level.
So, if a school, for example, is a K-4 charter school and they're adding grades 5 or 6, 5 and 6, let's say, or whatever it might be, we cap the amount of funding they can receive at the highest grade level they served in the prior year.
So, if they're a K-4 school, we would cap the amount we would provide for grade 5 and 6 at the level that was provided for grade 4 in the prior year.
As part of the implementation or authorization, I should say, of SP 604, there were a couple of bills that went through the legislature at that time, and there were some different proposals.
I think initially there were two bills that wanted to provide funding for all expanding charter schools.
One bill in particular proposed any charter school that was increasing by at least 10% would get advanced funding.
Another bill was proposing 15%, any charter going by more than 15% could receive advanced funding.
There were concerns raised with those bills primarily through the committee analyses that they raised concerns related to increased state costs because of increased borrowing.
to the extent that the state was providing funding earlier, there would be increased borrowing costs.
There was also a concern raised just about the equity of this, given that continuing schools have no mechanism for receiving advanced funding if they're growing.
So, some districts are growing rapidly.
Sometimes when charter schools close and districts get all of those children back, there's no mechanism for them to get advanced funding.
They have to wait until P1 to get that funding.
So those two concerns were raised and what came out of that was the statute that we have now, which limits it to charter schools receiving advanced funding only if they're adding a grade level.
Since the inception of Education Code Section 47652, there have been two waivers that have been presented to the board and approved by the board.
Those were strictly eliminating the cap on the highest grade level served.
So there were two cases where the highest grade level served was relatively small in comparison to the other grade levels, and so the cap was waived so that they could receive more money for those new grade levels.
So based on all of that, we're recommending denial of this request for a variety of reasons.
One is we think this waiver would modify statute in a way that was specifically considered and rejected by the legislature.
It would increase costs to the state to the extent that it increased borrowing costs.
It would create an inequity between charter schools and ongoing school districts and county offices that have no mechanism to get advanced funding when they're growing.
Charter schools do have borrowing options.
While they might be more limited than school districts and county offices, they are specifically authorized to borrow money from the County Board of Supervisors and the county office, in addition to some other options.
Education Code Section 41330, which speaks to advanced funding, is specifically not waivable in statute.
And while this section is waivable, the intent of this is very similar to 41330, so it kind of creates
It's maybe a workaround to something that isn't typically waivable.
And then I think the last thing we would note is just the precedent that it sets for waiving something and allowing expanding charter schools to receive funding beyond what the statute currently provides.
We have received questions in the past.
And in some cases, it's not so clear as this one is, where two schools have said, we want to merge.
It's not evident that they're actually related in any way and they want to merge.
And I think it just could get, it could set a precedent for considering more of these things in the future.
So, I think that's all of our concerns.
I would just add, if you're interested in pursuing the waiver request, we would have some suggested conditions that we could provide to you.
Okay, thank you for that presentation.
I'm going to public comment.
Go ahead, the superintendent.
To our good staff member.
Hi, Karen.
So you described the precedent-setting nature of this and the extra costs.
How big of a precedent-setting would this be?
It seems to me to be big and has the equity issues between different types of public schools.
I think we don't know yet.
We have certainly gotten informal questions and interest in this, so it's hard to say how many we would get, but I would imagine once the door is opened, it could be a significant number.
I would think if you were interested in going down this road, we would certainly have additional conditions that we would want you to consider in addition to the ones that we would be proposing here.
But it's hard to say, but I expect that to the extent charter schools are growing, we could start receiving a lot of requests.
Okay, thank you.
That answers my question.
It does seem precedent-setting like opening Pandora's box in a way, so.
Okay, I think we'd have public comment and then a discussion.
This is pretty complex, so let's have public comment.
Will the following individuals please line up?
Tom Pellegrino, Colin Miller, and Eric Premack.
Good afternoon.
I'm the principal executive director for the San Diego Cooperative Charter Schools, so I'm not sure if you want me to stick within the one minute for public comment or whether you have more time.
My name is Tom Pellegrino.
I am the executive director of the San Diego Cooperative Charter Schools, and I'm speaking in favor of the waiver, of course, that was submitted by San Diego Unified.
As you consider the item in front of you, I implore you to consider the following realities.
We operate two schools right now with the students from both of those schools currently receiving the LCFF funding that we're asking for.
Approving the waiver does not increase the financial obligation to the state, and the precedent-setting piece to this is
you have about one a year of charters that actually consolidate.
So if you look at it from that lens, you're really not talking a massive precedence.
Approving the waiver does not increase your financial obligation.
If the waiver is denied, the shift from two CDS codes to one CDS code.
Tom.
Yes.
is disproportionately impacting us.
If denied, 100% of the funding for 299 students will be deferred for six months.
That will put a $75,000 impact on our ability to meet the needs of a very disproportionate special needs group.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Colin Miller with the California Charter Schools Association.
We are in support of this waiver request.
With respect to setting precedent, we know that this board does consider each waiver specifically on the conditions and the circumstances for each waiver.
So we're less concerned about that issue.
That's why the waiver process is in place so you can consider each unique circumstance.
In this case, there's really no cost to the state because the school, had the school not merged, they would be getting that money for the school that had they not merged, right?
They each would have been getting their advance apportionment.
Now they're going together, they're only getting the advance for one school rather than the combined school.
So the ADA is known.
The enrollment is firm, so there's no risk to the state in terms of that.
The cost and the difference between districts and charters on these advance apportionments is that the cost of borrowing for charter schools is incredibly high.
School districts have really easy access to low cost time that charter schools don't.
So this is a significant cost to the charter school without really having any cost to the state relative to the waiver request.
Eric Premack, Charter Schools Development Center.
I'll associate myself with Colin's comments.
In addition, I speak, I feel a little bit
well-placed to speak to the intent of the law here.
We were the ones who sponsored it and actually wrote it and Senator Anistad carried it for us.
And this is a different situation where you have two schools consolidating.
So trying to say that what was originally a law that related to brand new schools or schools adding grade levels that they didn't serve previously, you can't really make an intent argument one way or the other on this one.
With respect to state costs here, it's absolutely minuscule.
And with respect to Pandora's box, we look at how many waivers a year do you do on school site council or on RSP ratio or on summer school meal.
If you were to not grant those waivers, you'd cut your waiver workload by 90 percent.
overnight.
So, and that's not, with all due respect, State Superintendent, it's not a reasonable time to deny the request here.
So, I think the law here compels you to grant the waiver or urge you to do it.
Thank you.
Okay, now we're ready for board discussion.
Board Member Strauss.
I just have a question, and I'm not sure if it's our CD staff member who is the best to answer, but maybe, Lisa, you want to try this one, and then maybe my other colleagues will also have questions.
But we have two schools merging, and they're getting a brand new CDS number.
So I'm not sure, no, will they keep their same number?
The school is closing, and the students are merging.
So they keep the original number.
And does the data follow them into the new school?
No.
So we just the school that closes that data doesn't follow but the original school does keep their data, right?
Okay, that's my okay.
Thank you remember
So this, I'm not clear under what provision the schools are merging.
Is there, it seems like it would be a material revision to the initial charter.
Did that happen?
Was that approved by the district?
So this is just, this is an accounting issue with the ADA?
That's what I'm trying to understand.
Okay.
And I think we don't have any specific guidance or statute that speaks to schools that are emerging.
Yeah, I think that's just kind of the reality of what's happening, but there isn't really any statute that speaks to that.
Board Member Sun.
So I'm curious if we were to consider approving this waiver, what would be the CDE's recommendations on the conditions?
I think we had proposed three conditions.
Two just have to do with timeliness of getting data.
Sometimes we hear schools have closed, but we don't ever get official confirmation.
So I think we'd want official confirmation by the middle of July.
We would want the minutes confirming the charter schools intent to emerge to support that.
And then I think we would just add a condition that
Will provide funding based on what they would have gotten what was reported by the the closing school in the prior year at p2 And we would offset that by any amounts that might be owing that had not yet been collected for LCFF and EPA just only those things that that we're providing funding for okay to make sure that we're not overpaying and
Yeah.
No, no, no.
It'll be 17-18.
Yeah.
17-18.
So.
Go ahead.
OK.
So I don't want to get into the weeds of this, but with the closing of the other school, I'm assuming that whatever was in the reserves would also go to the new school.
And it just seems like this is about the needs of additional students in a enrolled in the
Sorry, it would be the closed schools, the students.
It's about student needs.
It's where we're coming from.
And it feels like the analysis should have been looking more at the fiscal impact of all the new students coming into that school, mitigated by maybe some reserves or whatever it is.
But it seems like this analysis is based on an assumption of an intent of law rather than the kind of what the real needs are for the students in the school.
So, I mean, I'm kind of I'm really leaning more towards approving it with those conditions.
I think you're right We weren't necessarily looking at the needs of the students coming in.
We're looking at the statute and what the law provides and Board member holiday
You said a couple of times that the fiscal impact would be increased borrowing that the state would have to do.
I don't understand why that would happen if the school were not to close, if the two schools were to operate this next year.
It'd be the same amount of funding, wouldn't it?
It would, and I think to the extent that we're providing money sooner for a school that's expanding, like any school, it's increasing the amount of cash that goes out.
I'm not sure that this particular example, this particular case is a good example, but to the extent that more money has to be paid out sooner, the state has to borrow money, more money up front and then incurs increased interest costs.
Okay, Board Member Williams.
I'm a little bit confused about that because if they were, if the two schools stayed two schools, they were both getting advanced apportionments.
So, what's the, what's the additional money?
I think, too, it depends on where the students are coming from.
Again, this might be a unique example, but school districts, for example, get the greater current or prior year.
So, to the extent that charter schools are growing, districts continue to get money while charter schools
There may be, it might be a matter of double funding up front rather than, it just affects the cash flow of the state.
So overall, in the end, at the end of the year, it might not matter.
It just means the state is providing more money up front in some circumstances, meaning more interest costs for the state.
In the end, at the end of the year, in this example, it's going to be the same thing.
I think we're ready for a motion.
Board member holiday looks like he's right.
Well, I'm not the the waiver liaison I was going to allow the wait for liaison to make a motion if she wanted to but Okay, let her make go ahead.
But I didn't hear you.
Oh, but if I'm allowed to make the motion I would I would move that we accept this waiver under the CDE conditions as described second
Yeah, let me add my thinking on this is since San Diego Unified made this request, I haven't heard any overwhelming evidence to override the local judgments here at the local level.
If the district was opposing it, it might be different.
That's my personal view, but... Okay.
Thank you.
So do we have to make the motion and second it all over again or can we assume this is the motion we just made and seconded?
Yeah, he made the motion with the conditions, didn't you?
Yes, and I seconded it.
Now we're reading the conditions, which is a good idea.
Okay, we've read the motion.
Are we ready to vote?
All those in favor of the motion, raise your hands.
Okay, that carries.
Thank you.
Okay, now we're on waiver 12.
Who is presenting this for CDE?
Waiver 12.
It's the state meal mandate.
Right, go ahead.
Sorry.
Good afternoon President Kirst, board members, Superintendent Torlakson.
I'm Donna Reedy with the Nutrition Services Division and I'm here to discuss item W12.
Three districts are requesting a waiver to Education Code 49550, better known as the state meal mandate.
during summer school.
They are asking for this under the authority of Education Code 49548.
We wanted to make a note before we went into our analysis that the department is fully committed to ensuring that public school districts meet their obligation to provide a nutritious meal to students each school day, and we have made tremendous strides in that area.
In 2005, AB 1392 took effect, greatly curtailing the circumstances under which a summer meal waiver request shall be approved.
Prior to this, in 2004, the CDE analyzed 139 waiver requests.
The number has gone down steadily since then.
In 2011, the SBE heard 16 requests.
Last year, four.
and this year we're at an all-time low of three.
This is due in no small part to careful screening, analysis, and technical assistance to assist schools in providing summer meals.
California Education Code 49548 specifies three criteria under which if a district demonstrates that it meets one, the SBE shall grant a waiver to EC49550.
Based on the CDE's analysis, all three requesting districts clearly met one of the three criteria.
One of these three requests, Waiver 5-3-2018 from Eastern Sierra Unified, qualified under the financial loss condition.
When evaluating this or any other financial loss waiver request, the CDE uses a four-step process for its analysis.
One, examine projected revenues, expenditures, and cafeteria fund balance.
This includes validating data against CDE records, including ADP, percentage of needy students, and accounting reports.
It also includes a comparison to nationwide averages and industry guidelines.
Step two, discuss any unusual projections with the district if necessary.
This is to determine if the district has a justification for projections that do not closely align with historical district data, average nationwide costs, or reasonable labor costs.
Step three, recalculate as needed to reflect reasonable revenues and expenditures based upon district historical data, district justifications, and industry standards.
During this process, we may adjust labor hours, food costs, and we may also look at alternatives to lunch.
Breakfast is far less costly to produce.
Finally, CDE determines whether the district qualifies for a waiver after reasonable adjustments have been made and makes its recommendation to the SBE.
Technical assistance in providing a summer meal is provided to those who are recommended for denial and suggestions for improvement are offered to those recommended for approval.
The CDE chose to use a very conservative approach with this particular waiver and had the district not qualified, it would have been open to discussing with the district whether meal service, we reduced it down to one hour, which is I do believe the original projection was
two hours per day per site, and I reduced it down to one hour per day per site.
So I cut it in half and they still qualified.
This one hour might not even be feasible to produce a meal.
So we kind of push limits on that.
They still qualified even under this extreme scenario.
Therefore, the CDE recommends that the board approve this and the other two waiver requests.
Any board member questions?
Any public?
Board Member Rucker.
Well, not so much a question, but a comment.
First of all, I want to thank you for all the work that you did on this and having the conversation with the staff and preparing this item.
The staff were very, very diligent in the research they did and the work they did.
Nonetheless, we have to understand that there is a perception in a state where we are supposed to be the fifth largest economy in the world.
We do have communities where children are hungry.
And even in this state, we have the legislature right now looking at policies and proposals to support college students where hunger is an issue for them as well.
So there is this perception about what it means for districts in these particular communities to make this request.
And it's not so much whether it's a hardship on the district, but the hardship then that is left for the families to find the other options
that would be in place for them to get those meals for their students.
So this for me personally is a very difficult type of waiver proposal to consider and I'm very glad to know that the waiver request and the number of waivers being granted has declined.
But there's still a perception for the parents in the communities that will be affected by the approval of these waivers that the hardship and the difficulty is being passed
from the district to them.
So I just needed to, I felt it incumbent upon my role in this process to say, I understand what the law says, but you know, to quote Dickens, if that's the law, then sometimes the law is an ass.
Agreed, Member Rucker.
And I'll just have you know that over the years, our division has spent a lot of time maybe kind of embarrassing people in the serving.
But really, we do our best to coax every single school district into not just providing an adequate meal, but a truly nutritious and wholesome meal.
Thank you.
Okay, is there any public comment?
Yes.
Yes, we have one.
Michael Flores Castaneda.
Good afternoon, Michael Flores Castaneda with the California Teachers Association.
Here to speak in opposition and urge you to deny this waiver, specifically that of the Eastern Sierra Unified School District.
The gentleman just a little bit ago said that if you stopped approving these waivers, you would cut your workload.
I didn't think of taking that route.
But this really is a serious matter.
We have 36 students that will not be eating lunch over their summer instructional program.
That really is a concern, especially in these very rural areas.
I'm providing you the calculation sheet from the Eastern Sierra School District, which wasn't included in the initial board write-up.
If you note, that calculation sheet is dated January 2016, so I wonder how accurate and up-to-date these numbers are.
It's at the top right corner.
Also, further examination of this calculation sheet, if you look at page two, the district is saying that it would take them four cooks and four custodians to create 36 meals.
That seems a little inflated to me.
And lastly, I just put it to you as Ed Code 49504.
If you do approve this, the Ed Code 49504 states that the state board and the state superintendent are required to provide leadership and resources to the district so that they can ensure those students have lunches.
Thank you.
Okay.
Board member discussion on this waiver?
Oh, Emma, come forward, please.
I didn't sign up, it's my fault.
I was on consent when I first got here, so.
Sorry, Lee-Angela Reed on behalf of the California School Nutrition Association.
We represent all the food service directors in, not all of them, but a large portion of them in the state.
Also, on behalf of the Small School Districts Association, both on behalf of both associations want to speak in support.
of this waiver.
The food service directors do their best to try to provide meals whenever possible, but sometimes logistically and given financial steps, particularly for super smalls, you're a difficult time.
The department worked very closely with the districts to try to find the means and we ask you to approve the waiver.
Thank you.
Okay, board member discussion on this item.
Okay, you're making the motion.
Okay, is there a second?
Seconded, okay.
All those in favor, raise your hands.
Okay, that is approved.
All right.
So we're going to do the regular consent items and then we'll take a break.
So before we get into the items 10 through 13.
So I'm, regular consent items 5 through 8 are still on consent.
We need to hear individual regular item number 9.
So I'm looking for a discussion and then a motion on the regular consent items five through eight.
I'll move.
I'll second.
Alright.
Is there any public comment?
Yes.
We, for number five, we have Roberto Forenza and looks like Mara Ortiz.
Go ahead.
Good afternoon board members.
My name is Roberto Fonseca and the reason why I'm here for is because each of you are going to get a copy of a document that is being, that is part of the LAUSD.
It is called the 2017-18 application for funding under the CONAP.
You have three documents 2016, 2017, 2017, 2018 and another one for 2017-2018.
The reason why you have it before you is because
And any of those items, there's a section that it says here, the LEA first, I'm sorry, the LEA must keep the minutes on file, which indicate that the application is approved by the committee.
We're referring to the DILAC.
On April 21, 2017, I was present at that meeting and there was no quorum.
Therefore, this item was not approved.
I looked at information on the other items and there's no indication that this item has been approved.
First part.
The second part of it is that LAUSD uses this vehicle to address other issues such as Title I, Part A, Title I, Part D. But let me say that there's no information given to parents
on those items.
When I make it clear, the LAUSD is not making, giving information on Title 1, Title 2.
They only do it on Title 3.
They do it very limited.
Thank you very much.
Buenas tardes.
Mi nombre es Maria Ortiz.
Soy un padre de LUSD.
Estoy aqu para decirle las malas prcticas de LUSD.
Nmero uno.
Good afternoon.
My name is Maria Ortiz.
I'm a parent of LAUSD and I'm here to say that LAUSD is not carrying out the consultation with parents.
Okay.
Point number one, LAUSD is not carrying out the consultation process with parents because the schools are not connected to the district ELAC or the DELAC.
LAUSD number two, LAUSD is not explaining how the Title III funds are being, the Title III funds, programs and services are being used.
Point number three, LAUSD is not explaining the new ELPAC and the ELD instruction in all of the schools.
Numero cuatro.
Se est revisando el plan maestro, pero no se est consultando con los padres de ILA, por lo tanto no se est recibiendo esa informacin de los comits ILA en las escuelas.
And point number four is that while the district does have a master plan, EL master plan,
It is not being explained to the parents and therefore there's no information to the parents about the EL master plan and therefore the parents are unable to provide their consultation or input, significant input to the district EL master plan.
And for that reason, the English learners are performing at the lowest levels for the district.
For lack of monitoring.
Thank you.
Okay, that concludes the public comment.
These are the consolidated applications.
I take it this objection is to the whole approval of the whole application of LA Unified?
Is that what I'm... Staff will help us with this?
LA Unified is not on this agenda.
You've already approved the CONAP for LA Unified.
But these objections were concerning LA Unified?
But they're not on this agenda?
Correct.
So there's no action that you can take and... Yeah, the CONAP for LA Unified is not on this agenda.
So when...
Okay.
Yes.
So, I guess Superintendent Torokson, could the staff follow up to clarify this with the, I mean, would that be appropriate?
Absolutely.
So, we'll see Glenn's right there.
All right.
I'm ready for a motion on five.
It's on nine.
Where am I?
5-8.
Okay, 5-8.
So I'm ready for a motion on the 5-8.
Totally.
We need a vote.
Okay.
All those in favor?
Good.
Okay.
Now we need to hear item 9.
Good afternoon.
Item number nine is approval of the charter school numbering assigned to the newly established charter schools.
The State Board of Education is responsible for assigning a number to each approved charter petition.
CDE presents this item routinely as an action item before the State Board.
It's a standard action item.
The CDE is recommending that State Board assign a charter number to each charter school that's listed on Attachment 1.
California Code of Education 47602 requires the State Board to assign a number to a charter school that has been approved by the local entity in the chronological order that it's received at CDE.
The charter schools listed in Attachment 1 were recently authorized by local boards, as noted, and a copy of the petition is on file at the department.
Okay, is there any board discussion or?
Yeah, we have public comment, I assume.
Yes, okay, go ahead.
I'm sorry, I don't have attachment one in front of me.
It has, I can bring it to you.
There are several charter schools listed.
Do you want my attachment one?
Yeah, what I'm interested in knowing more about is I seem to remember that there was multiple charter schools with the same name in a geographic area.
There is the first seven listed on the item are from Mojave.
They are from the authorizing entity is the Oro Grande School District and they have authorized seven different non-classroom based charter schools.
And are all of those charter schools in the same geographic area as the district?
They are in the geographic area of the district or the county.
So
They're in the, they're in the county, not in the geographic area of the district.
Are they, do they have any kind of Shasta violation?
I don't feel that we have the authority to respond to that.
This is really, this item itself is an administrative item.
So what we look at, what we get from the petitioner is the application, we get the approval, the minutes, and then we get a copy of the petition.
But we don't put any judgment on whether they should be authorizing that school or not.
Okay.
Board Member Holliday.
Traditionally, isn't it the obligation of the local authorizer to either raise a question or not regarding a new school opening?
It is up to the authorizer.
They're the ones certifying that.
It is a local certification.
Correct.
And so the idea that the state board is assigning these numbers is more sort of a process thing.
But the certification comes at the at the authorizer level.
Right.
Correct.
We look at it as an administrative function on our on the behalf of the state board.
Thank you.
Public comment.
Michael Flores Castaneda.
Back so soon.
Good afternoon.
Michael Flores Castaneda, California Teachers Association.
And I had the same concerns.
That's why I had signed up for public comment was whether or not these were in the LEA district and why also there was a need for seven new numbers, seven new charters in an area that is 77 square miles.
But I think you have the same concerns also being raised.
So thank you.
Any further board discussion?
Do I have a motion?
I'll move CDE recommendation.
All right.
All those in favor, raise your hands.
Okay.
That carries.
So the board will recess.
One no.
Okay.
Not voting.
One no vote.
Okay.
The board will recess and we'll return at ten after three.
Is this from CDE?
And we're now at State Board
projects and priorities and item 10.
And so I'm going to ask for a motion on to approve the minutes.
All right, is there a second?
Okay.
Second, Williams.
All those in favor, raise your hands.
We have a quorum.
Okay.
Now I'm going to go through alphabetically for people to report on their state actions and their advisory groups and so on.
Member Burr.
Not here.
Okay.
Member Holliday.
Of course, it leads on to charter schools will be doing that in a second and also to the Environmental Literacy Steering Committee.
I just wanted to mention a couple of things about what's going on with them.
First of all, Senator Ben Allen.
is working with the Environmental Literacy, pardon me, Literacy Steering Committee and the fiscal agent, Ten Strands, on Senate Bill 424.
It was put on hold last year.
There's going to be some work to revise the bill and revise the wording.
But the goal here, the hope, is that this bill will deepen education and resource agencies' commitment to California's environmental principles and concepts
It'll give a clear direction to the State Superintendent of Public Instruction to facilitate bringing environmental literacy to students.
And it will encourage CalRecycle's Office of Education and the Environment to provide technical assistance to education and resource agencies whenever young people are being educated about the environment using the EPNCs.
The Steering Committee has been very active in promoting
environmental literacy across the state, and has presented at numerous conferences, including the California Council on Social Studies, the Charter School Conference, the Inland Empire Science Community of Practice, and the National Green Schools Conference.
Okay, thank you.
Member Rucker.
Well, I know that board member Strauss will talk more about the CPAG meeting.
I would just say I was present at this month's CPAG meeting and listened to a very interesting presentation by staff to the CPAG about the growth models as well.
The other thing that I did was on behalf of the board, I did attend the interstate compact meeting.
This is concerning the relation.
I did not, was not able to attend it on May 4th.
because of other obligations.
This is the organization that California belongs to dealing with transition and interaction issues for students who are military dependents.
I also participate or at least represented the board in a meeting with a group of students who were on a field trip
to Sacramento from Palos Verdes High School.
These students, it's become a part of their work as a group of interested citizens to visit with their elected officials.
And it was a Q&A session with them that was held over at the state capitol just to talk about things going on in Sacramento.
We're the beneficiary of this relationship because we had a former student member who was from Palos Verdes High School and this is a
relationship we've been able to continue.
So it was very nice to get to do that on behalf of the board as well.
Okay.
Member Burr, we're ready for your report on state board priorities.
I think I actually made my report at the special meeting for the collaborative meeting.
I would just say that we are continuing with our recruitment for the executive director and we'll be holding interviews later this month and hope to announce a new executive director at our June meeting.
Okay, good.
Member Sandoval.
Yes, special education issues.
I'm the liaison with the Advisory Commission on Special Education and I attended the last meeting.
And I'm just going, it's rich because we meet for a couple of days.
So I'll just offer a few really brief highlights.
But I wanted to mention related to the interim assessments that two commissioners during our time when we were receiving updates on the assessment, two commissioners described the utility of the interim assessments.
as being really valuable teaching tools for students who are really at risk.
So just voices from the field that they're really using them.
And commissioners also met with key legislative staff members who work on education issues.
And in addition to advising the state board, the advisory commission also advises the legislature.
So it was really important for them to make face-to-face contact with the key staffers.
And then another thing is the Ad Hoc Working Group working on mental health issues with the Advisory Commission on Special Education is involved with an effort that will take place in Sacramento in November, Breaking Barriers, which is a multidisciplinary cross-agency effort to address the mental health crisis that's not only happening in our schools but in our society.
And then finally, we heard a very good brief from the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing on the new education specialist credential structure.
And there's a lot of interest in that, in the specifics of that and the preliminary credentials that are focused with special education teachers and their preparation.
And a full implementation is estimated for fall of 2020.
And I know there's a real interest in designating a liaison between the Advisory Commission and the CTC to closely be involved in that as that develops.
And there's also concern about how are we going to prepare our
teachers in general education to work with our students with disabilities because they're general education students first.
So that I think is really an important issue to convey as the liaison.
And then transitioning on to history, social science.
The materials and prices are available on the CDE website, so that's now up.
And then Dr. Ortiz-Licn is the liaison in the Ethnic Studies Model Curriculum, and that work has just started.
That's my understanding.
And then California State Summer, well actually, Visual and Performing Arts Standards, the revision, the final meeting of the group working on that has occurred.
And then the Instructional Quality Commission will review the revised standards in July.
And then those will be up for public comment in August and September for a 60 day period.
Then the work later this year begins on the Visual and Performing Arts Frameworks.
So that is a continuing process.
And then the California State Summer School for the Arts had a total of 1,417 applications.
523 individuals were accepted.
And what is, I think, very indicative of the outreach work, out of the 58 counties in California, 53 had applicants submit their applications.
So, and there was an increase of applications from rural communities.
and also an increase in applications from African-American students as well as Latino, Latina students.
So it's really representative of the work that the school is doing to make sure that we are preparing our next generation of artists and people in the creative industry.
So a lot happening.
Okay, yes.
Eileen Strauss.
So I'm going to update because we didn't do a report at our special meeting in April.
Member Rucker and I are liaisons to IQC.
And so I'll just sort of summarize.
And I think Member Sandoval just said that we had a meeting in March.
There's another meeting coming up May 17th and May 17th.
But we did have an update on the Ethnic Studies Model Curriculum and they'll be working on that on the 17th.
And Member Ortiz-Lacombe is the liaison for that.
The health framework, we had a lot of input on that.
It's gone out for its first 60-day public comment period.
And the draft computer science standards are also going out for its 60-day public comment period.
And then there was approval of an online survey for public review and comment as well.
We had a presentation on environmental principles.
So there's a connection there with what Member Holliday was talking about.
And then WestEd presented on the California Standards Implementation, which they also presented at the collaborative consortium I'll talk about.
And then we approved the Science Instructional Materials Adoption Committee panels.
And so...
That happened at IQC, so IQC again is coming up May 17th.
And then on March 27th and 28th, the California Collaborative for District Reform met, I was the state board rep, and they met focusing on English learners in Garden Grove, and we used Garden Grove and Santa Ana as the focus districts.
Really exciting talk about English learner instruction and how they're really narrowing the achievement gap.
So a lot of talk about the full and work and using those levers
The issues of academic language and then the role of district and team leaders and change agents, which I think really affects the system of support discussion.
The resources are available if anybody's interested in some of the things that they shared, but I think just really exciting how they use qualitative as well as quantitative data interviewing me.
They had a panel of teachers talking with us and just amazing on strategies.
If anybody's interested, I'm actually going to visit Garden Grove on next week and May the 15th.
So they, Gabrielle Amafi, the superintendent, really has asked to come and see some of our schools and see some of this work in action.
They really have broken the, they've been long-term solid instructional leadership stable in that district and really doing great work.
So I just thought I'd share that since it's such a goal of ours to look at.
We had a special, a meeting with CDE State Board and CESSA team kind of taking a look at all these communities of practice and what we should do particularly for planning for principal support to implement Common Core.
Is what we're discussing, where everyone's identified that we need more administrative capacity and there's some money in the Bechtel grant through communities of practice to support that.
And so we had to Peter Birdsall and Sassessa convened a group of us to meet and there'll be some ongoing discussion to try to look at capacity building to continue to do the implementation.
And then PACRIS, which is authentic assessment beyond just our traditional exams.
They met at New Tech High School here in Sacramento on April 11th, and very exciting looking at exhibitions, graduate exhibitions, really exciting work on alternative assessments.
CTC actually had their meeting on the same day of our April meeting for our special meeting, but I went to their morning meeting.
So they are updating the admin services credential to align with the new standards and looking at a new admin performance assessment.
And there's some minor changes, which I think we would all be really obviously supportive of, which is making sure that our candidates understand the cultural diversity issues and socioeconomic diversity issues.
that they increase their skills in creating collaborative student-centered practices in classrooms, which we talk about, and a culture of learning that supports all students.
So they had a special presentation on MTSS, multi-tiered systems of student support, talking about inclusive classrooms, what that means for practice, and inductions programs so that if teachers are getting a teaching credential,
multiple subjects and they're getting a special credential, they haven't aligned one single induction program.
So it's really nice to see the alignment between the work we're talking here at State Board and then the credentialing and authorization process that's happening at CTC.
And then at April 17th, they had the first of the materials review process swearing in all the reviewers.
And I have to say there were more than 100 teachers there in the room
The energy was amazing, so exciting.
They are so ready to spend their time going through all these materials.
They want the new science materials.
It was just really exciting.
And to the CDE team credit, right?
Pam was there with me.
They worked really hard to make it an interesting, creative process, considering they had to go through a week's training to learn how to review all these materials.
I just think there's just so much excitement out there in the process.
So they haven't probably got all the materials delivered now.
They'll find out how much work they have to do.
But anyway.
Yeah, and then on the 19th of April, we had a Common Core Implementation Consortium stakeholder meeting.
So we do this once or twice a year to say, like, how are we doing with all our stakeholders that are not implementing Common Core?
And we had several panels.
One was school and district staff talking about
what they're doing in their districts, what the challenges are, and what their successes are.
Then we had organizations present on those that are supporting districts in doing the work, like their non-profits, different organizations.
And then they had a few of us at state panels talking about what we see as implications for state policy work.
It was very exciting, sort of an ongoing work to help us guide our state work in Common Core, which we know we've done great work, but we still have work to do.
CPAG, I would just make my comment, you could add to it, Member Rucker, but all the work we did at CPAG informed our actions this morning on this morning's items and Chief Deputy Price was there with us and Member Valdez was there.
We all worked really hard and I would say the benefit of that was a better, like, improved.
We went through it again today.
It was really good.
And then Member Valdez and myself and Member Ortiz-Lee Cohn,
went to the women who lead all the women appointed by Governor Brown and
All of us, we passed out, we brought for you the programs where all of your names are in there and just really thanking everyone for their public service in this administration.
So that was really fun.
And then my other comment was State Superintendent Torlakson said, I just wanted to thank the CDE for what they did to help recognize the distinguished schools.
Because if you've been a site leader,
That recognition is really significant and they also went to exemplary awards and arts and performance and this room was full.
I mean, when we're talking 1600 people in a room, you're wondering if you're in the back half, do you even have a sense of what's going on?
There were student performances at such a professional level, acting, singing.
It is the hope of the future, what the distinguished schools represented.
And it's the work that is really coming to fruition.
So just the CDE team, I was really fortunate.
I really was there because my sister's school got an award and I went there to take my picture with Tom and her, so and Mickey Mouse and Minnie Mouse.
I just have to say I was so fortunate because, I mean, honestly, when my school won, it was so exciting.
And to see the quality and the caliber and the commitment across our state, just so exciting.
So just to thank you very, very much, CDE and their team for putting an amazing process together.
Thank you.
It's quite a litany.
Members on.
Oh, after.
So we have the Joint Workforce Advisory Committee and we are meeting on Friday.
We're finalizing our draft principles.
And so I'm hoping to bring this to this board either in July or sometime in the very early fall.
But give you an update, more thorough update on what we're doing with the committee and where we are in general with CTE pathways.
We're also talking about a July item on CTE, which I participated in with board member Sun and so we're working on that.
Been a long time since we've talked about that topic and it'll hopefully be in July.
Yeah, we should.
Yeah, member Valdez.
A couple of things.
I did attend CPAG, and I just really have to compliment the CPAG representatives.
They had such great conversations and really in-depth looking at the different models.
So we were very impressed by that.
And as far as world languages, the last Standards Advisory Committee meeting will be on May 24th and 25th.
And they felt that it's very important, and we all agree, but they really are making sure that all students have access and are going through the standards through that lens.
The IQC will be reviewing the standards in July and the standards will be posted for 60-day public review in August and September.
So we really encourage all to review the standards and to provide public comment.
And then finally, work on the World Language Framework will begin at the end of the year and please look forward to any of the applications that will be coming from CDE staff.
Board Member Williams.
Of course, member Holiday and I attended the ACCS meeting last month as we do every other month since we either, both of us have been on the board.
I counted up the other day and I think it's 40 something of those that I have attended in addition to the board meetings having missed only one ACCS meeting and so far only one board meeting.
And just like your CPAG meeting was very helpful for you in terms of preparation for today, that's why we attend the ACCS meetings because it gives us a deeper understanding of what the issues are and what our questions might be.
I want to follow up.
Also, just quickly on your comment about the Next Generation Science Standards Materials Review.
Member Strauss and I have been the NGSS liaisons since the beginning, all the way through standards curriculum framework, all of that.
But when it came to Instructional Materials Review, my commitment has been at that point, once we had the curriculum framework, my commitment has been the policy coherency between
helping to get NGSS into the state's accountability system now supporting all of the stakeholders in getting a placeholder for the NGSS assessment on the dashboard.
So I've focused on that and told member Strauss, I'd like to beg off the instructional materials review because I've never been a teacher or worked in a school district and she's been all of those things.
But hearing you describe that first meeting, I sure wish I was there.
Yeah, this is, I will say a couple things.
The science people that I have met since I've been on the board, which I never knew before, any of them before, the science teachers, the science teacher leaders, have been absolutely one of the highlights.
of this last seven and a half years experience.
They have not lost one ounce of momentum and interest and passion about NGSS.
I would think they would be so fatigued that they would be begging off of things, but they so embrace NGSS and support each other in a way that I've just never actually seen and been a part of.
And it's been really fabulous.
It's like the air beneath my wings.
as the days or months get long with all of this.
And in particular, I want to shout out to Kathy Durana, who is the director of the K-12 Alliance at WestEd.
And I met Kathy first when we were doing the standards development.
She was hired as the facilitator for the, what I call the group of 80, which was the first group of teachers and others that were looking at the standards that were coming from Achieve.
I'm making comments on them.
And then we refined it to the group of 24, which was a science expert panel.
Kathy Durana facilitated that as well.
She was absolutely instrumental in the science curriculum framework.
And then she's been the executive director for the past four and a half, three and a half years of
of the NGSS Early Implementation Initiative, and she's also the spearhead with CDE for all of the NGSS professional development rollouts.
And she's just been an absolute warrior for NGSS and somebody that I feel very privileged to have gotten to know
and to spend time with and to be in regular communication with her and to have learned from her.
So just want to take a minute to kind of acknowledge that because I was thinking about it, especially recently when all the people came up with this letter asking to have NGSS, a state assessment, have a placeholder in the dashboard.
Those of you that got a copy of this, in all the time I've been on the board, seven and a half years, I've never seen a coalition this big.
with this many names supporting this particular request.
And it's people like Kathy Durana and Jill Grace and Jessica Salko and others that continue to put their energy into it every day.
So I admire them and respect them for their work.
Lastly, this is computer science year for me.
And so there's the computer science model standards that are being worked on and out for going out for public review.
They'll be going to IQC, I think it's in June or July.
And then they're expected to come to the State Board of Education in September.
And I either for action in September or action in November.
Simultaneously, right now, the computer science
strategic implementation advisory panel is meeting.
I've been to the first two full two-day meetings.
I want to thank Barbara Murchison for her facilitation of those meetings.
It's a different kind of panel and it's really very high level with the governor and the superintendent and legislative leadership making appointments.
And none of them had ever met each other.
And that's always a challenge.
Plus, they all came from different perspectives in terms of what they knew about computer science and what they could contribute.
And by the last meeting, they were becoming a well-oiled machine, I felt.
And the final meeting will be at the end of June.
It's June 25th and 26th.
And I think the understanding is that they will develop recommendations for implementation.
And those recommendations of computer science, those will go to the state board also in September for consideration of approval or adoption.
And then that will get turned into a state plan by CDE.
So those are the things that I've been involved in and I think we're between science and computer science.
Both of those have been just absolutely a joy for me to help lead.
Okay, good.
That ends the item 10 and now finally we're on to item 11.
I want to, you know, thank the people who have been waiting and we appreciate your patience.
So we'll now have the CDE present.
And then we'll have further discussion and a public hearing before that.
Item 11 is a petition for International Studies Language Academy.
The timeline for this petition in November on November 7, 2017, the Los Angeles Unified School District voted to deny the petition for International Studies Language Academy from this point on ISLA by a consent vote.
January 16, 2018, the Los Angeles County Board of Education voted to deny the petition by a vote of 4 to 1.
The ISLA petitioners then submitted a petition on appeal to the state board on January 29, 2018.
The CDE is recommending that the State Board hold a public hearing to deny the request to establish ISLA, a TK-8 charter school under the oversight of the State Board.
The recommendation is based on the following.
The unsound educational program.
The CDE has concerns about the implementation of a two-way dual language immersion model in four languages opening at the same time with 400 students from a TK-8.
The staff also feels that the petition is demonstrably unlikely to successfully implement the program.
Based on an unrealistic financial and operational plan, we feel that the school has very aggressive enrollment assumptions.
There is an inability to recruit qualified teachers to open up this fall in this two-way dual immersion program in the four different languages, as the petition states, and we are concerned about the ability to secure a facility.
This petition may sound familiar to some of you.
It was previously approved by the State Board and I'll go into a little history about that a little bit further in the presentation.
But the school did not open at that time and at that point it had been denied by the Glendale Unified School District.
CDE also feels that there are deficiencies in the charter petition in terms of employee qualifications, admission requirements, and in the dispute resolution procedures.
And I will highlight some of these elements as we continue through the presentation.
The Advisory Committee on Charter Schools met on April 10, 2018.
At the meeting, the petitioner at that point did propose to push back the opening of the school by a year to 2019-20.
The petition before you is to open up this fall.
At that point, we actually conferred with our CDE legal to determine if we could move forward with the petition at the commission at that point.
And we determined that this type of change would be considered a material revision to the petition.
So we did notify the petitioner at that point and notified the commissioners that we would only be looking at the petition that was before us and not with any intent of opening a year later.
So the findings would be based on the current petition, which had an opening date of this fall, 18-19.
The ACCS moved to recommend approval of the petition to the State Board, but the motion did not pass by a vote of four to three.
Five votes are required to move an ACCS recommendation forward to the State Board.
Therefore, no recommendation was moved on this item.
Now, to talk a little bit about the previous state board approval, and this was back in 2016.
So, February 19, 2016, EastList submitted a petition on appeal.
It was denied by the Glendale Unified School District and the LACoE school board as well.
May 12, 2016, the State Board voted to approve the ISLA petition at that time for a five-year term from 2016 to 2021.
June 15, ISLA submitted a request for a material revision to delay the opening of the school to meet the conditions of the petition at that point.
They were unable to find a facility, so they couldn't meet the conditions as stated by the State Board of Education.
On September 9th, 2016, the state board voted then to approve the material revision to change the opening from 2016-17 to 17-18.
Eastlick could not secure the proper facility and meet the conditions set forth by the board at that time.
So the school did not open and in essence voluntarily closed the petition for lack of a better term on March 13th of 2017.
To go a little bit more into CDE's findings, the first finding of the unsound educational program, we do feel the petitioner does not present a sound plan for its projected enrollment layout.
They are anticipating to open the first year with over 400 students this fall, and increasing to almost 800 students within two years, which is an increase of over 80% over two-year period.
They are also, the educational program is based on a 9010 two-way dual immersion program that is being modeled in four languages, French, German, Italian, or Spanish.
Again, to open up with all four languages over nine grade levels this coming fall.
In year one, the school would open four languages offered to over 400 students.
And we are concerned that the described program would be best implemented over a gradual implementation instead of trying to open up all four languages with all grade levels with 400 students all at the same time.
And we have seen examples of this with the Franklin Elementary School in Glendale Unified where they actually did do a gradual approach in implementing a language actually for them over almost a nine year period.
We are concerned about the ability to recruit and hire qualified teachers in four languages prior to the start of this year.
We find that to be problematic.
And the petitioner states that they will also explore alternative teaching credentials such as exchange credentials, which is fine.
But again, the concern is how then will these teachers come on board in the fall and then be able to transition into actual teaching credentials as the year progresses through.
So the complexities of the educational program, beginning with these four languages, makes this educational program highly unlikely to be implemented in a manner that we feel will benefit the students.
Continue on into fiscal, and CDE did review the projected budget and multi-year financial plan, and we have made a determination that the financial plan is not fiscally viable due to negative fund balances and no reserves over the first three years.
The budget itself also does include startup loans for about 500 and some odd thousand and also the public charter school grant program.
We have eliminated those from the budget analysis, particularly the charter school grant program because those are not guaranteed sources of funding.
And the program is also reimbursement based.
So the funds would have to be spent first before the school could then be reimbursed.
So we don't feel that that is a viable piece in their financial analysis.
And facilities are still a concern.
The facility costs are unknown.
The ESLA petition does not talk about or describe the type of facility needed to operate this size and the scope of the projected enrollment, because again, it is over 400 children.
They currently do not have a Prop 39 agreement with LA and don't have any facility prospects to house the starting enrollment of 438 pupils.
In terms of the deficiencies in the charter elements, one that we identified was employee qualifications, and I talked about this a little bit, but we felt that the petition lacks a reasonable, comprehensive description of the employee qualifications, particularly for these non-credentialed teachers.
They are intending to potentially bring on non-credentialed individuals from internships overseas for these four specific languages, but there really is no plan or timeline for how these non-credentialed teachers will then be
be converted over into a credential teacher over the time period described in the petition.
We also do have concerns about the admission requirements.
They call for a two lottery pool system.
They describe it as 50% of each grade will be in each pool.
We just really don't see how that mechanism is going to realistically work.
So we do feel that there's more work needed in this portion of the admission requirements.
And they also have a preference for ISLA founders, and we feel that that is also very unclear.
They describe certain criteria to be founders that contribute personal substantial time and efforts and resources, and we feel that that needs to be hashed out a little bit more about what that preference really means if you are indeed a founder of this school, and how that then plays into this two-tiered lottery system as well.
So in summary, we have concerns about the complexity of the educational program, the aggressive enrollment projections, their fiscal viability, their previous and current facility issues that are still viable now, and their admission requirements.
So that summarizes my presentation.
If you have any questions for me at this time.
Questions at this point?
If not, then I can open the public hearing.
I will open the public hearing.
And so each side has 10 minutes.
And so we'll start with the petitioners, the International Studies Language Academy.
The top one?
No, it should say EASLA presentation.
That one right there.
There you go.
OK.
Let's make sure.
Can they see it?
OK.
Good afternoon.
My name is Gwendolyna Ayala-Mahler and along with Phil Wilson, who's here today, I am co-lead petitioner for ISLA, a new K-8 school, TK-8, school dedicated to college preparedness in a two-way immersion context.
We offer four language options, French, German, Italian and Spanish.
This, as you know, is not the first time ISLA has come before the State Board.
In 2016, SBE conditionally approved ISLA and then approved a material revision to delay opening.
We also secured a PCSGP grant, were accepted into the Lake Osalpa and worked with the Turner Agassiz Foundation to find and fund a facility.
Despite their support, we were unable ultimately to secure a facility within the narrow confines of Glendale.
It was the one condition that we weren't able to meet.
But let me go back and talk a little bit about the genesis of ISLA.
ISLA was dreamed up by a group of parents from Franklin Elementary, a K-6 school in GUSD, which offers immersion in the same four languages as ISLA.
Franklin itself emerged organically from the efforts of several energetic parent groups and grew into a remarkable school that is entirely dedicated to immersion and is so successful that it has a waiting list of 500 to 800 families every year.
So why ISLA?
because in addition to needing to accommodate more families, and despite the success of Franklin, the immersion programs were not fully continued into middle school.
Undaunted, we rolled up our sleeves and petitioned GUSD for ISLA to provide much-needed immersion capacity in elementary school and continuing immersion into middle school.
This option doesn't exist for German or Italian or French and is scarce for Spanish.
Now, as we work to define ISLA, our model for elementary school was right in front of us.
As parents, volunteers, occasional substitute teachers, we have stubbed our own toes on the many stubbling blocks of a new immersion program.
But what about grades 6 through 8?
No public school in LA County offered the programs that we envisioned.
So we searched the US for schools with continued immersion in middle school, in multiple languages, and in a charter school context.
It was a tall order, but we found a model so successful that it's ranked one of the best schools in the country, International Studies Charter in Miami.
We sought them out and partnered to share curriculum and best practices, and we also sought out their service provider, Academica.
We wanted to work with professionals with a deep, first-hand understanding of what we proposed to do.
In International Studies Miami, we found two additional programs which complete and support the middle school, neither of which exists in LA or in the LA area.
One is immersion which starts in 6th grade, a second chance for kids who missed out on immersion in elementary school.
The second is an option for kids already fluent in a second language to learn a third.
ISLA would offer many more children, currently denied a bilingual education, a chance to learn in a two-way dual immersion programme, which strives for a balance of language speakers and learners in each class.
We've designed our programme according to this model because research has shown that it produces absolutely the best outcomes in fluency, both in English and in the target language.
But that's not all.
Two-way dual immersion is at the top.
It also has the best outcomes in reading and math, and this is true in all subgroups.
I could go on, but I do need to address some of the concerns.
The first is our choice to open all viable grades at once and questions regarding our ability to reach our enrollment targets.
It's important to remember that ISLA was not conceived out of thin air, but in response to specific community demand.
That demand
is for more capacity, not just in kinder and first, but in higher elementary grades.
Since those first parents lobbied GUSD for Franklin, over 3,000 families have been turned away because of lack of capacity.
Many of these families still hope for a second chance at immersion.
It's something parents are passionate about.
Second, demand for continued immersion in middle school, but you can't support a middle school without enough fluent students.
So meeting demand in these upper grades means we can create a more solid base for the middle school programs.
Plus, getting a larger base of students in all of our programs will actually help us to stabilise financially more quickly.
How do we know we have the numbers?
Our enrollment projections are based on data collected over a long period of time, starting with a 2015 parent survey, followed by data from our 2016 pursuit, from our brief period of actual enrollment, and from our current petition, plus our mailing list, which has over 800 subscribers.
We know that there is overwhelming need for this program.
And as these heat maps show, families are willing to travel long distances.
You can see how tiny the print is.
But that's not enough.
In order to ensure full enrollment and to achieve a racially and ethnically balanced community, we've compiled an extensive outreach plan which includes almost 300 preschools, summer camps, after-school activities, community organizations, and so on.
I myself have hung out
at parks and rec centers, summer lights, and so on, talking to people, sharing my experiences with immersion.
And people respond.
People are hungry for better schools, and immersion has a track record of success.
Finally, the facility.
The one reason why we were not able to open in Glendale.
So why not?
Well, first, Glendale is tiny.
So real estate inventory is extremely limited.
Second,
Glendale has tax incentives for production companies.
And every time we'd find a suitable space, we would be outbid by Disney or DreamWorks.
Third, GUSD has, Glendale has no buildings already zoned for school use.
So no matter what, we knew we were gonna have to go through a CUP process.
District schools are not an option because we applied for Prop 39 and were denied because most of our prospective families were actually from LAUSD.
In our search for a facility, we worked with the Turner Agassiz Foundation, but also with brokers such as CBRE, NAI Capital, Campus Real Estate, and we established a relationship with NAC Architecture in case a build-out was necessary.
Even so, by January of 2017, we realized that we would not have enough time to go through the CUP process and open.
Now, we could have just crossed our fingers and hoped for the best, but that is not who we are.
So recognizing that most of our prospective families were from LAUSD, we rolled up our sleeves again.
And by March, we had officially closed ISLA in GUSD and started petition writing again in LAUSD.
Why is LA different?
Well, for one, Prop 39.
We applied and received a conditional offer.
Had we been approved by LAUSD or LACO, we would be opening right now with a facility, but time has run out for that.
Also, the real estate market in LA is much, much larger, and there are spaces ready for school use.
We have identified two potential options for a 2018 opening and continue to look for more.
We have hundreds of families who are just waiting, hoping for ISLA and a chance at a high-quality education in more than one language.
We've brought 128 letters of support from these parents who, since they're hard-working families, cannot get here from LA.
But here are some of their voices.
I grew up in Germany and I really wanted my children to study in German, but we live in the LAUSD school district and didn't get into the Franklin.
I have two children in the Franklin program and it was very difficult to get them in.
So many families are denied the opportunity.
We have hundreds of families on waiting lists, but once they get to first grade, forget it.
It's too late.
They just don't have the language proficiency.
to be accepted into any programs.
So what then?
Do we just give up on immersion?
I don't speak any German, and Benjamin is already translating for me.
At third grade, my older son is already fluently reading, writing, and communicating in two languages.
It's very important
in today's world to have another language.
I don't know where to go from here because her schooling goes up to a certain grade.
I would support another school because I want to see my children continue in middle school as well as in high school.
I've been learning Italian but I can't continue without ISLA.
Authorizing ISLA is fundamentally important.
ISLA will give so many more kids a chance.
So I hope you'll consider stabilizing this program so that the hundreds and hundreds of families who participate in it can continue to reap the benefits of it.
In middle school, we don't have very many immersion options.
So, please authorize ISLA.
Please authorize ISLA.
Isla.
Es super importante darle esta oportunidad a nuestros hijos.
Time.
Thank you.
Okay, thank you.
And now we'll have 10 minutes for the opponents to the petition.
Good afternoon, Board President Kirst.
And yes.
Let me close this for you so you don't need to look at that.
Let's go there and I'll do that.
One more step.
Okay.
Good afternoon, Board President Kirsten, board members.
I'm Robert Perry, representing the Los Angeles Unified School District.
I was asked to come up today to appeal to you to accept the recommendation of our board, followed by the board of the Los Angeles County Office of Education, and now the recommendation of city staff to deny the petition that's before you.
I would also like to mention the non-action of the advisory committee that has already been mentioned.
The LAUSD vote was on consent.
The LACO vote was 4 to 1 and the advisory commission was 4 to 3.
The LAUSD board found that ESLA had an unsound educational program, was demonstrably unlikely, and the petition was not reasonably comprehensive.
LACO found the same thing, unsound, demonstrably unlikely, not reasonably comprehensive.
CDE found the same thing, unsound, demonstrably unlikely, not reasonably comprehensive.
Three authorizing staff
Four authorizing boards have looked at the petition.
We asked this board today to give consideration to that fact, give weight to the fact that local boards have expressed their voices on this proposed charter school.
I don't want to repeat orally what you've already heard and have studied in your documents, but I do want to bring out just a couple of things that I think are salient this afternoon.
First of all, the CDE staff report says that the complexities of the educational program beginning with four different languages makes this educational program highly unlikely to be implemented in a manner which will benefit students.
something to definitely consider.
Our team found a very similar thing.
LACO found a very similar thing.
The enrollment rollout and programmatic rollout was found to be unsound by all three staffs.
Perhaps most significantly, CDE on page 7 of 9 in their report says, the process for lottery and admissions includes practices that the CDE finds impermissible and contrary to the Charter Schools Act, which requires ESLA to admit all pupils who wish to attend.
That's referring to the 50-50 two lottery pool issue.
That caused us great concern.
because we believe that, as the Charter Schools Act says, that charter schools have to admit all students who wish to attend.
If we begin to open this door with qualifications on admissions, our team could not see where that might end.
I've mentioned the three salient, three of the salient issues.
We found, our team found six out of seven elements with issues as did LACO found about that many.
The CDE, at least four elements of the petition.
These are fundamental issues of soundness and capacity.
Deep concerns in order to be successful to meet the needs of all students.
across numerous submissions.
I ask you to give consideration this afternoon to those at the local level who've expressed their voice concerning the deficits in soundness, capacity, and comprehensiveness that simply cannot be touched up for an approval.
These deficiencies are so fundamental that for this petition to be approved in accordance with statute would require extensive material revisions.
I thank you for your time this afternoon and stand ready to answer any questions.
Thank you.
Okay, that concludes the opening presentations and I guess we'll, during the public hearing, we'll have public comment and then we'll discuss the issue.
Please call the public sign-ups.
Would the following speakers please line up?
Angela DeRamos, Ken Burt, Phil Wolfson, and Ramel Antone.
Hi, Angela de Ramos representing California Teachers Association.
I know dual immersion very well.
I taught in one.
I helped write a charter.
And my kids are in part of a dual immersion program.
So I know the needs very well.
And I can also say there's very specific planning and pedagogical needs when you're talking about a dual immersion program in one language, let alone four.
And it looks like this charter was not prepared to launch.
So we urge you to deny the petition.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, members of the board.
My name is Phil Wolfson, and I'm one of the ISLA development team and co-petitioner.
I'm an educator with 25 years of experience in all levels of education K through 12, district and charter schools.
I also have two children who attend dual language immersion schools and who have benefited greatly through their immersion programs.
ISLA is an innovative program.
It offers four languages,
and an option for middle school.
There's a great need for this type of school.
Unlike other schools that have an immersion component, ISLA has immersion and international studies as a central focus.
ISLA is also a supportive environment.
We included in the petition structures and systems to support all learners with intervention and supports.
One of our core tenets, and my area of focus, is supporting all students' success.
We intend to not only provide high-quality immersion education, but also make sure all students get the support they need.
It's been a long road to get to this appeal, and we've worked through many different appeals and iterations because we believe so strongly in our mission.
We're confident that with time to work through logistics, we can successfully open and fulfill the mission of the school and make this a model school for the landscape of education in California.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Board.
Ramel Antoine with the California Charter Schools Association.
I just want to make a couple points.
The first one is that the team that's running ISLA or is proposed to run ISLA is not just a team that has come off the street.
I think Gwen made a really good point about showing her expertise and working with the community.
But this model has been proven to work before in another setting, of course, but they are bringing that into this community, and the community is asking for that, as evidenced by the sustained interest in the school.
I think additionally, this board, or many members of this board, have approved a petition similar to this one before, and what stopped them before was the facilities issue.
We know that LAUSC has provided them
Prop 39 offer, which they've lost.
And so they're back in the search for facilities options again.
And so we're in that loop again.
But this team is sound.
There's no fiscal issues that are there.
We can talk about the program implementation and what it looks like to do four languages in a dual immersion context.
That's definitely a conversation that we had.
But ultimately, this is a sound program and the community is asking for it.
Thank you.
Eric Premack, Charter Schools.
We're in favor of granting this one.
They are guilty of being ambitious.
This is a complicated proposal with lots of moving parts.
You've talked about this proposal in the past.
But I think it is doable.
And we do have quite a few charter schools that are either dual-language immersion or multi-language immersion who use this sort of admissions, multi-lottery pool.
And we think it is compliant with law.
There's one just
over here in Sacramento, Sacramento Language Academy that's been around for umpteen years, very successful.
So we know that's doable as well.
So we think this is a solid proposal.
We admire the tenaciousness of this group as they grind through the difficult facilities process and hope you can support it.
Finally, we're very concerned about this notion that start date is an element of the charter that is a material revision.
You're not required to put a start date in the charter.
It's not one of the required subjects.
And to the extent that you require it, you put petitioners in a hot box where some of them have rushed to open in the past with disastrous consequences.
And we hope you'll think carefully about that.
Ken Bird on behalf of the California Teachers Association.
The time that you open the charter school is a material revision.
The department was asked about that.
Everyone was asked about that at the ACCS meeting.
I don't want to come back here next month and have them in here asking for a material revision to get yet another year.
They already pulled that before.
The touchstone of this is, and anyone who is there, go look at the replay of the ACCS, is they want to open in 18-19.
I mean, they want a year deferral.
They want a year beyond that.
They're not ready.
The touchstone is they're not really ready and they're going to be cutting the number of students in there and they're just not ready to do it.
The better thing for them is to withdraw and start this again.
But they've already been up this thing of not being able to do it again.
And frankly, this and all the other issues, I don't know where my other CTA colleague is, but she teaches dual immersion and I wanted her to give some extra testimony.
Okay, very good.
So, don't be put into the box of granting another material decision when these people really aren't ready.
That concludes the list of, and so I declare the public hearing closed and now we're ready for board discussion.
of Eileen Strauss.
So I just, first, I just want to thank the petitioners.
I mean, their passion, they've been before us several times.
I believe this is the third time.
And what I hear and believe in so much is their passion to provide dual immersion and their support for the program.
And so I think, and I just as the board member who supported them the last two times coming through, I think there's a need for dual immersion.
I do think
Ken Burt makes a good point about thinking about its capacity and what the scale up ought to be for it.
But this is the third time we've heard this program, and if we approve it, they'll be back again because it won't be able to open, so it'll be the fourth time.
And so I'm just wondering whether we ought to really help provide some guidance, not maybe from us, but from some of the supporters, to think about
maybe phasing it in over time or starting with a smaller scale and then growing it.
But I just feel like three times in two years and it's still not open, I feel like we probably ought to start fresh and look at a scalable model.
And I just would say as a board member who supports charters and supports
dual language and the support of the petitioners, it's a wonderful option for students and for families.
I'm worried that the scale of this, three times already, and so I guess that's my only request is that they consider what an appropriate scale up might be so they can actually get this open.
Thank you.
No, no.
This is my comment.
I just think, just as a one member of the board, I just want to say that I really supported the program.
I'm disappointed that the two, it isn't open yet.
And I know that parents are disappointed.
I know the petitioners are disappointed as well.
Other board member discussion?
Board member charter liaisons?
Well, I'm hoping to hear other board members ask questions or make comments.
If not,
I don't see it.
Okay, then what I would say is going to be similar to what Member Strauss said.
And that is, conceptually, I support dual immersion.
I think it's a, I see why all the parents want it, and the students want it, and I wish I'd had it myself and had opportunities for my children.
So it has nothing to do with dual immersion.
But I feel like the program is back again with not enough time to meet the enrollment deadline to start in the fall.
And there was mention made at ACCS that it wouldn't be ideal to try to pull that off with 400 students and teachers for four languages.
If they couldn't pull it off, then it would require a material amendment, which bothers me less than the fact that it also changes the budget, it changes the finances that are needed, it changes everything.
And I'm not sure even if there was a material amendment, if there was an appetite among the board for a material amendment to reduce in the fall, to let them start in the fall, but reduce the scope of it and the scale of it, whether or not with all the budget changes that would require, whether or not it would be able to successfully implement.
And if not, then we're talking about really going another year again without any guarantee of a facility or keeping the same students or keeping the same interest.
I also, so I never thought I'd say this, but what Kent Burr said resonates with me.
sense of humor here.
OK.
So but in addition, I think Eric Premack, it makes a really important point that I think needs more discussion at this board, not not today, but needs to be taken up by this board and the and the charter liaisons.
and even the Charter Association and others that support charters, is that as it becomes more and more difficult to get facilities for charter schools, the time frame we're now working on where charter schools submit petitions early in the fall, then go through months and months and months as they go through district, then go through county, then get here, and then they still don't have a facility, probably the timeline ought to change.
So they're starting to look a year and a half ahead instead of, you know,
Approved now and we'll be we'll try to be ready in six months that appears to me to no longer be a realistic or feasible Way to approach approach what they're doing so
And I really appreciate, I think the operator is very smart.
I think that the fact that you went to one of the highest performing charter schools, not charter schools, but dual language immersion schools in Florida and looked at them as best practices and learned from them and all of that was a really smart thing to do.
All that said,
I feel like the kind of all of the issues that are related, the concerns that have been raised in terms of trying to start four languages at once, having to move out of Glendale where there was clear evidence of strong parent support because there was already a dual immersion charter school that was over capacity and needed a feeder.
moving out of that student population, the difficulty of getting enough teachers to speak in the different languages, the difficulty of getting a facility in time to start, the recognition even by the charter petitioner that it would be very difficult to pull off the current petition by September and it would require changes in it, substantive changes in it.
For all of those reasons, I'm going to move the CDE's motion to deny.
Second.
Okay, moved and seconded.
Any further board discussion?
If not, all those in favor, raise your hands.
Okay, that carries unanimously.
Okay, we're now on to the next charter item, which is item 12, the SPARK Charter in Santa Clara County.
Item number 12 is for Spark Charter School.
January 17th of 2018, Santa Clara County Office of Education denied the renewal petition for Spark Charter School with a vote of 4 to 1 with one absentee.
January 29th, 2018, Spark submitted the petition on appeal to the State Board of Education.
The CDE is recommending that the state board hold a public hearing to deny the request to establish Spark Charter School, a K-8 charter school under the oversight of the state board.
The recommendation is based on an unsound educational program, significant declines in year-to-year pupil performance, and we'll talk a little bit about the fall 2017 dashboard results.
This school has been in operation for three years.
Demonstrably unlikely to successfully implement the program, we have some concerns about their fiscal viability, expenditures that continue to exceed their revenues, over-reliance on parent and community fundraising, and short-term emergency loans that we've seen over the three-year periods that they have been in operation.
We also see deficiencies in the charter elements in terms of their admission requirements, their race and ethnic balance, and methods for measuring pupil progress.
The Advisory Commission on Charter Schools met on April 10, 2018.
The Advisory Commission did move to recommend approval of the petition to the State Board.
The motion passed with a vote of 5 to 2.
A little bit of background on SPARK.
It is authorized by the Santa Clara County Office of Education through June of this year.
It's currently serving 248 pupils and shares a campus with Columbia Middle School in the Sunnyvale School District.
They plan to grow to over 400 pupils by 2021-22.
SPARC has stated that for the 2018-19 school year they have enrolled 290 students and they have 250 on their current wait list.
So on November 21st, 2018, the Sunnyvale School District first granted conditional approval of SPARC subject to compliance issues in their conditions by April 1 of 2014.
On April 24th of 2014, the Sunnyvale School District took action to rescind its original conditional approval of the petition based on SPARC's failure to meet the conditions set forth in this resolution.
So on April 1st, 2014, the Santa Clara Office of Education approved SPARK for a three-year term on appeal to serve students from grades K through 8.
Although SPARC has only been in operation for three years, and we do understand that the education code for renewal does require four years, we did look at the information that was currently available.
So the CASP results do reflect a decline in year-over-year pupil performance.
Spark here in this chart from the 15-16 ELA went from 73 down to 58.
And in the 15-16 math score, a 65 went from 65 down to 55 in 16-17 for math.
This chart here shows where they are on the fall 2017 dashboard.
They are green in mathematics at this time, but they are orange in ELA and they have under the change category show that they've significantly declined by 51.2 points.
In terms of our findings on fiscal and operational, we have found that they have an inability to sustain fiscal viability.
And since we did have three years worth of budgeting information to take a look at, we were able to take a look at that as well as their future budget.
And at this point from our analysis for 18-19, SPARC has a minimal reserve and minimal positive funding balances.
And this is due primarily to their reliance on over $100,000 worth of fundraising.
For the current year, 17-18, they did receive over $84,000 worth of fundraising by December of last year, and they were budgeted for about $126,000.
They have to date raised a total of $194,000, and part of this was also to cover $135,000 in a one-time legal fee, but they did cover that with the additional fundraising they did do in the second part of last year.
Their multi-year projected budget includes fundraising of $105,000 up to $130,000.
So the fundraising by the parents in the community, it is relied upon in their budget and it has increased and there's increased need over the next three years as we've seen in their multi-year budget at this point.
The fundraising efforts are from the SPARK parents and the community, but we do feel that there is a reliance on these fundraising efforts to really meet their operational costs each year.
We have also seen that there are quite a few short-term loans, including loans from board members to basically stay afloat over this three-year period.
They do also have some outstanding payables that are not included in their budget projections, one being a $250,000 loan from the California School Finance Authority.
And this loan is actually, should be paid over a five-year period.
But since they were only authorized for three years, we just didn't see evidence that they had in their budget to pay this off, be able to pay this off after their term expired.
And actually to see where that additional $100,000 would be coming out of their budget.
And also an over allocation of Prop 39 space.
The second interim report that we reviewed was positive due to a 3% salary reduction that was voluntarily taken by some of their teachers and these additional fundraising efforts that I talked about in the previous slide.
The deficiencies in the charter elements, deficiencies in the charter elements.
We are concerned about their admission requirements.
Their parent agreement requires parents to participate in scheduled shifts of two hours per week per pupil.
And they also have to participate and serve on a school-wide committee.
So we do see this as a deterrent to admissions for some parents who cannot, who that alone would stop them from even having their student be a part of the lottery system.
We also have a concern about the race and ethnic balance.
There's a chart here that is in the next slide that was actually in the petition from the charter from SPARC.
And as you can tell in SPARC here, they have an 8% free and reduced price meal percentage and socioeconomic disadvantages at 8.9%.
It is substantially lower than the rest of the schools in the surrounding areas.
Columbia Middle School, where SPARK shares a campus, has a 53.7% of students that are eligible for free and reduced lunch percentage.
Sunnyvale School District, 30.7, and the Santa Clara County at 36.1, and SPARK is at 8%.
And we bring this up more in the sense that we really do feel that the parent fundraising to maintain their fiscal viability and the parent hour requirements are really two pretty large deterrents for admissions for this charter school.
In summary, we do have concerns overall about their academic performance, fiscal viability, the admission requirements, and the race and ethnic balance.
And that concludes my presentation.
I'm here and available for any questions that you may have.
Okay, technical questions from the board for Board Member Rucker.
Hi, how are you this afternoon?
So, I heard you make the point concerning the free and reduced lunch comparison.
And I heard you also say that there was an issue with the racial and ethnic balance, but I probably blanked out when you were giving those numbers.
Can you tell me what the racial and ethnic distribution numbers are?
So for... It's hard to see here for... Okay, it's too small.
You do have... Okay, you do have a presentation with you if that helps look at them a little bit better.
I didn't... Okay, that's okay.
I know the chart is a little small here.
Okay, you still need to read.
Okay.
For SPARC in terms of, so we talked a little bit about the free and reduced percentage for them is 8%.
Socio-economic disadvantage is 8.9.
And then they have an Asian population of 30.6, Hispanic 19.4, white 26.7.
So, across the county or the schools within their surrounding areas, there is a disparagement between them and the other schools in their area.
Not as big as the more of the socioeconomic and the free and reduced price meal percentage.
That is more of what we're concerned about and how those can be
In essence, if you're trying to balance that out within your school and the district, some of these other things like the parent requirements and the parent requirements and this criteria could be deterrents for them to, for parents to want to instill their students at the school.
Okay.
Well, no, I think it's important that when you look at this, there are absolutely no African-American students enrolled and almost twice as many Hispanic students enrolled at some of the other schools.
So I'm glad I got a chance to see this.
Thank you for going through it because it is a little hard.
I know it's small.
Thank you very much.
And that that did come straight from the petitioners petition.
Any other questions?
Okay.
If not, then I'm going to declare the public hearing open.
And we'll first take 10 minutes for the supporters of the petition to renew the charter school.
This one?
No.
Oh, wait, this is Santa Clara.
Oh, sorry.
So let's go back here.
Oh, there, that one.
That one's dark.
Is that that one?
Down here?
No, that's yours.
OK, right.
That's yours.
Stephanie, that's OK.
Let's do that top one.
OK, there we go.
Good evening State Board members, Superintendent and staff members.
I'm Dr. Neeti Madan, Sparks Board President and Parent Founder.
I would like to first thank you all for giving us the opportunity to hear us today.
But before I go into the details of the staff findings, I just wanted to introduce our community school to you.
So we are a grassroots charter school in our third year, and we are the only K-8 public school choice in Sunnyvale.
Our education program is based on three tenets of social-emotional learning, project-based learning, and parent partnership.
We're also the only school in Sunnyvale School District that has a Prop 39 facility.
This chart over here essentially shows you the divide in Sunnyvale School District where you have the schools on the north side that have been historically underperforming and the schools on the well-near south side that have been high-performing.
Spark founders created the
There is one exception over here, which is the Fairwood Magnet Explorer program, which is rated seven over here.
And that is one program that SPARC founders helped create.
But we were still lacking in authentic project-based learning in Sunnyvale.
And hence, SPARC was created to meet the needs of Sunnyvale families.
This chart over here shows you our enrollment trend.
We started out as a K-6 school in 2015-16, and next year we are projected to be around 290 enrollment.
We have a very strong demand for this program in our area, and we have a current wait list of over 230 applicants.
And applications have continued to pour in despite having been turned down by the county.
Now I would like to address some of the concerns that the CDE staff raised about our fiscal standing.
And as you can see over here in the budget summary that I have up over here, our ending balance for 2018-19 is going to be $500,000 and not $2,000.
And the reason for that is that staff looked at an older budget version that we submitted during the January appeal, and they also made a bunch of incorrect assumptions that led to those conclusions, and I will go over those with you.
So our current school year's ending balance is going to be, we are going to be hitting at 9% target reserves.
And yes, we had to do fundraising to meet our one-time big expenses, but we also responded by reducing our expenses and fine-tuning our budget.
Our ending balance also includes the prior year's Prop 39 over-allocation penalties, and we've always budgeted for an over-allocation fee for the school year.
We had budgeted $40,000 for the school year's over-allocation, and our staff is saying it is expected to be around $65,000.
Our budget can absorb the additional $25,000.
I'm sorry.
The other assumption was that we received a five-year... that the charter school loan that we received is due up for like three years, but that's not... I'm sorry, I'm kind of getting a bit... Can you just hear me?
Yeah.
So we have already paid three years of the loan and we have two more years to go.
Yes, we received a five-year loan even though we were authorized to operate for two years.
There is also this perception that SPARC is in the pattern of taking out a lot of short-term loans, and I want to give you the context that that's not the case.
The first time SPARC took out a short-term loan was in July 2016, because we had $250,000 PCSGP grant money left that was expiring by the end of that month, and we really wanted to make use of that grant, and we spent it on buying all the school supplies.
And we have been very transparent about this with the county as well.
And when that reimbursement came back, as you know, that PCSGP grant is the grant that you have to first spend and then you get the reimbursement back.
Once we received the reimbursement back, we were able to pay off that loan.
The second set of short-term loans were taken during this school year, and as you can see the chart that you have up over here, we grew by 35% this year, and this is the peak of our enrollment curve.
And as a result of that, the CDE's disbursement schedule is set up in such a way that
The 35% growth that we experienced, the funding for those students only comes in in the March of the school year.
So we bear the expenses of teaching those students until then.
That did necessitate the need for having these loans, but we've paid those back in full.
And in future years, we have a very gradual enrollment increase, and we do not anticipate any more short-term or cash flow situations arising.
So we have a very strong plan.
The other assumption that the staff made was they did remove our local revenue, but we are not a new school.
We have three years of data and trends and projections, and we've also made our future projections to be very conservative.
Staff took out the aftercare revenue, but they let the expense of running that program be in there.
As of now, as of May 4th, we have $147,000 revenue from our aftercare program.
Similarly, in the case of fundraising, we have received funds of up to $195,000 that have been deposited.
And as you can see in the chart over here for this year, there is an anomaly.
We did fundraise a lot because we had all of these one-time expenses.
And most of the fundraising happened after we got denied.
Instead of our parents actually turning their backs on us, they doubled down to support SPARK.
And for a grassroots non-CMO school like us, we have to rely on the community to come together.
Next, I would like to address some of the issues that were raised about an educational program.
First of all, county used the wrong criteria to evaluate our year-over-year progress.
We are only in operation in three.
This is our third year, and we have only two years of academic data right now.
And we cannot be held to the standard of how we are comparing to the neighborhood schools.
Also, two data points does not constitute a trend.
It cannot project year-over-year.
And we also assume that, we also feel that the CDE staff did not do a de novo review of our academic program.
And I want to show you in this particular chart over here that we have to really look at the CASP cohort results for a school like ours.
Because there was a significant change of a student population between year one and year two.
There were only 33 students that were there in year one and year two that took the CASP both times.
We had a number of students who were there in year one who left in year two because they were not willing to be in a large five, six, seven combination class.
And some of them did also want a larger middle school experience.
And on top of it, we also had 24 new kids join that year as the cohort that the incoming third grade classroom that was added to that CASP pool.
So in our case, I would really urge you to look at our cohort data as that is really much more meaningful.
So this slide over here shows you how our SPARC cohort performs when you compare to the comparison schools.
And the green line over there is essentially the SPARC cohort data.
And as you can see, it is performing overall much better than most of the neighboring schools in Sunnyvale.
And the percentage that you see over here in the charts, like 2%, 9%, 22%, that dictates what percentage of students that are currently in SPARC would have gone to those schools.
And SPARC did outperform those schools, and 91% of our in-district students come from those schools.
County is going to come and next show you this data, that yes, there was a decline even in our cohort data.
But then the reason for that decline in both ELA and math is that we had a dip because of just one student who did not progress in ELA and two students who did not progress in math.
And when you're looking at a small sample set size of 33, one or two students can completely skew the average and give you a completely wrong perception.
I'd now like to let Director Chris take over.
Thank you.
Chris Mahoney, Executive Director.
Spark Charter School is only two and a half years old, and it has more than 50 percent of its population of students kindergarten, first and second grade.
There's only two data points for the CASP assessments that fails the statutory requirement.
They don't really give you a reliable measure.
So we believe our internal data is actually more reliable in terms of showing our growth and progress over time.
Whoops.
Sorry about that.
As you can see here in our cohort model that we're talking about of those 33 students in ELA, as you look at it, growth over time, fall to spring, fall to spring over those two years, you are seeing steady growth and achievement in both the lower school and the upper school.
In math, same thing, you're seeing with the same cohort of those 33 students, achievement and progress and growth year over year.
When we look at our EL subgroup for English language learners, we are also seeing progress in language arts, as well as math.
And again, these are year-over-year projections, and we still have our spring scores to project coming forward in the next few weeks.
Our Hispanic subgroup is the group that is of greater concern for us and for me specifically because even though they are performing well in language arts, math is a concern for us.
So one of the things that we're going to be doing is looking at targeting with more intensive support, small group instruction, one-on-one, use our SST process to make sure we can recognize and capture them
earlier.
We're even considering planning to have a math camp at the beginning of the year for any student who may be suffering from the summer slide as we call it.
One of the things I want to touch on right now is parent volunteering.
Parent volunteering is certainly important to Spark Charter School.
However, one of the things we want to be really clear on is that we no longer have those requirements of signatures.
There are no signature lines.
on our application for this year.
We have information about parent volunteering, but we don't have anyone have, we don't have them have to sign a commitment or even a commitment of ours.
For us, the philosophy of SPARK Charter School is about partnership with the parents and the community.
And just, you've got 300 good reasons back behind me here of why we should have the school continue.
Thank you.
Okay, now 10 minutes for the opponents to the chart.
Good afternoon, President Kirst and members of the State Board of Education.
My name is Benjamin Picard and I'm superintendent of the Sunnyvale School District.
Sunnyvale School District serves students pre-K through eighth grade.
And as a district, we embrace the concept of programs of choice.
And we have established five elementary and one middle school programs of choice.
We also have a local charter school, Summit Academy,
and we enjoy a very positive relationship with Summit.
Unfortunately, the same cannot be said of SPARK.
There are significant concerns that you've heard around academic achievement of SPARK students.
Percent proficient on the Smarter Balanced assessment decreased at all grade levels and for all cohorts between 2016 and 2017.
In addition, the fourth and fifth cohort experienced a precipitous drop in mathematics from 74% or advanced to 33%.
This indicates that SPARC students are being poorly prepared for the rigor of middle school mathematics.
Due to the small number of Hispanic students, grade-level data is not reported.
However, at the school-wide level, only 20% of Hispanic students were proficient in ELA and 13% in math, compared to 58% and 55% for all students.
This clearly shows that students' academic needs are not being met and that the program is increasing rather than decreasing the achievement gap.
We're very proud of the students in Sunnyvale School District.
Between 25 and 35% of district students tested at standard exceeded on 2017 CASP and overall, our academic performance is on an upward trajectory.
You may not know that the district originally approved SPARK and would have served as its authorizer.
That approval was with conditions designed to clarify provisions regarding educational program for ELA and disabled students
remove the admission requirements for parent participation, provide information regarding SPARC's curriculum, and adjust the budget for fiscal solvency and include a NELCAP.
SPARC did not meet these conditions and instead expressed the desire to be approved by the County Board of Education.
As a result, the district's approval was rescinded.
Since SPARC's inception, we have had difficulty in obtaining their cooperation on matters of mutual interest.
The district provides SPARC with space for its educational program,
But SPARC has consistently over-projected its ADA, refused to provide information regarding its student population, and has not met health and safety requirements, which has put all students at the site in jeopardy.
A SPARC employee molested a student, and more recently, a SPARC teacher was inebriated and passed out on district property.
Law enforcement was called to address the situation.
Sunnyvale School District does not have confidence that SPARC understands quality administration, instructional leadership practices, and procedures for operating a school so that it can serve students well.
We ask that you deny SPARC's request for renewal and I'll turn the rest of the time over to the San Antonio County Office of Education.
Good afternoon, President Kirst, board members, community, and staff.
My name is Christelle Johnson and I serve as the Director for Monitoring and Oversight for the Santa Clara County Office of Education.
Santa Clara County is the largest county authorized in the state of California with 23 schools serving approximately 10,000 students spanning over 31 districts.
We're here today because the Santa Clara County Board of Education, SECBOE, denied SPARC charter schools renewal requests on January 17th, 2018.
SPARC was initially approved in October of 2014 for a three-year term, and its beginning was marred by a series of safety, leadership, and governance challenges.
SECBOE stood with SPARC and provided active, continual support.
As required by Education Code 4760, excuse me, 47607, SECOE charter staff reviewed the SPARK renewal petition in an objective and factual manner.
We visited the school, met with parents, teachers, staff, and board members.
While our findings are available as part of your packet, I would like to provide you with some highlights.
When reviewing a charter renewal, Ed Code requires that increases in pupil achievement for all groups of students be the most important factor in determining whether to renew.
Staff reviewed the summative SBAC academic performance data provided by SPARK, which met or exceeded the performance of his neighborhood schools.
However, SPARK's year-over-year summative performance reflected a decline
of 15% in students at or above standards in ELA, and 10% decline in students' performance in math, reflecting its failure to meet the criteria for renewal.
In addition, when controlling for pupil achievement for all numerically significant subgroups, only Caucasian or white students maintain steady performance.
It is clear that significant declines in student performance for Asian, Hispanic, and EL student subgroups contributed to the year-over-year drop in ELA in math.
SCCOE also reviewed SPARC's California dashboard.
While its overall picture looks promising, when one looks deeper, a different picture surfaces as shown by decline significantly for all subgroups in math and ELA.
Even when using SPARC's own data, controlling for cohorts, SPARC's presented graphs showed declines in both ELA and math as referenced by the green bars.
Further, using SPARC's internal data on NWEA and DIBLS, upon submission of its petition, SPARC only provided 2016-17 data.
SPARC failed to provide fall 2017 data, although it was available when the renewal petition was submitted.
Even at the decision hearing before SCCOE in January, no additional data was provided.
However, SPARC did finally release its additional internal data, which was provided as a rebuttal to the CDE findings.
This data also shows additional declines.
As for SPARC's financial issues, there are many complications starting with its ADA.
SPARC's aggressive growth strategy results in large variances between its
budget and actual ADA.
The inflated estimates result in budgets where the income is over-exaggerated and expenditures are budgeted to meet the inflated revenue.
This causes an undue facility burden on the Sunnyvale Elementary School District and unbudgeted expenses for SPARC.
It is estimated that SPARC's overallocation invoice for this year will be about $60,000.
SPARC does not have the financial reserves or capacity to sustain additional ADA during the first nine months until March 2019 of the school year.
Using SPARC's provided financials, this year in financial analysis will result in a cash deficiency of $104,000 by June 30th and will close the fiscal year with a negative $61,000 in cash.
SPARC is unable to accurately budget for the school.
SPARC's discrepancies in budget to actuals has resulted in ending last year with a negative net, excuse me, negative change in net assets, and this year with a negative 110,000 cash balance.
Any fund balance it had was utilized in the first couple months of the fiscal year to survive.
Therefore, SPARC relied on loans and donations to meet expenses.
SPARC's last two audits reported donations averaging about 54,000.
Prior to denial in January, SPARC received about 27,000 in donations, tracking last year's numbers.
Only after denial did parents begin its aggressive donation campaign, procrastinating SPARC's admitted need for additional loans to complete the year.
The temporary increase in SOF funds are not reliable income in the future.
This year over application fees to SESD, past due special education invoices and the board member loan repayment are offset by the unanticipated increase in donations.
Some teachers voluntarily reducing their salary and refusing benefits for the remainder of the year and other minor adjustments.
SPARC's funds are insufficient to meet expenses with no reserves.
Its cash cannot sustain its expenses.
As a result, SPARC must continually obtain loans from board members or sell large amounts of its LCFF receivables to factoring agencies.
There is a constant scramble for cash.
As of June 30th, SPARC's assets will be a negative anticipated $216,000.
SECBOE's second finding for denial was that after review of the petition, even if all the issues were corrected, either through MOU or material revision, SPARC lacks the capacity to implement the program.
Through its academic instructional issues, compliance issues, finance issues, timeline issues, and other issues, SPARC simply has too many issues.
Although the passion and desire are present, the capacity is not.
Another factor for denial was that the petition lacks a reasonably comprehensive description of all 15 elements.
While Spark's petition lacked comprehensive descriptions in multiple areas... Hi.
Thank you.
Okay, I think we're now ready for public comment.
We'll start with the first 20 people on the list with the following speakers, please sign up.
Line up, Elizabeth Perez, Zoe Harries, Roshan Guruprasad, Eon O'Keefe, Jennifer Noble, Henry Sun, Brandy Willerby, Amira Willerby, Michael Willerby, Michael Flores-Castaneda, Ken Burt, Karen Gumar,
Ashwath Arakadu, Dorota Sun, Jerry Simmons, Rommel Antone, Danielle Stushinsky, Sita Vasireddy, Sridhar Raman, and Mari Moss.
Hello, my name is Elizabeth Perez and my daughter attends kinder at SPARK.
We left our public school over safety concerns.
Getting into SPARK was an escape from the chaos and distraction of aggressive behavior and emotional bullying.
At SPARK they teach social emotional learning and it makes all the difference in the world.
I also saw new excitement in her attitude towards school.
And two weeks after attending SPARK, she began singing to me in Mandarin.
I just wanted to say that every child is special.
Every child has potential.
Zoe will receive everything she needs to be her best, most amazing self at SPARK.
Please give us five more years at SPARK.
And in that time, we can prove it.
And next time Zoe can give her speech in Mandarin,
This is a great program and a strong community.
Please vote yes to renew.
Thank you.
Sorry about that.
This is your next speaker.
Hello, my name is Zoe, and I'm five years old, and I'm going to sing my Mandarin song.
I love my school.
I love my teacher.
I love my friends.
Thank you and please vote yes.
Hi, I'm Roshan.
I used to struggle in reading, but then Spark helped me out.
Now I love reading lots of books.
Please renew Spark.
We get to do lots of fun projects, such as the cardboard challenge, presentations, and we are also working on a book which will be published.
Hello, hi, my name is Ona Kee from the Spark Parent.
Today, as you've already heard, and are probably going to hear some more of, you're going to hear some pretty petty allegations from the district, which are parroted by the county, all in an effort to paint Spark in a bad light.
All of which, of course, as we know, are untrue and which have been successfully refuted.
So what are we missing here?
In short, why we're standing here today boils down to the basic aid district wanting to keep SPARC's attendance dollars.
It's that simple.
This is a district where a board member at a Prop 39 meeting publicly stated, every dollar we give to your children is a dollar we take away from our children.
Yes, they said that.
Every dollar we give to your children is a dollar we take away from our children.
So please keep this statement in mind when listening to any allegations or so-called facts from the district or county.
Thank you.
Hi, my name is Jennifer Noble.
I'm a parent at Spark Charter.
There has been politics at play from day one by those opposing Spark.
Even though other local communities have had a robust charter school presence, Sunnyvale resisted it for years.
At Spark's inception, the district argued that there was no interest in having a charter school in Sunnyvale.
History has now proven that district's narrative was clearly false and politically motivated.
Next, their line of attack is that students' performance is declining.
But the truth behind the numbers shows when comparing apples to apples, students who are at SPARC for both years of testing have improved and outperformed the neighborhood schools.
It is telling that instead of celebrating SPARC's achievements as a healthy option for local families, the district's only response is to destroy thriving competition.
Their interest is not with our children, but rather in protecting their turf.
This is politics at play, and our children are paying the price.
Thank you so much for your time today.
Okay, I will help him.
His name is Henry.
He's a first grader and he would like to tell you why does he like his school.
I like to draw pictures.
Please don't close my school.
I have to explain that he is an autistic soul, and he wanted to show you his work.
He's not a public speaker, so that's his art.
And Spark supports his artistic side and really work for him, for his imagination.
So.
He's a fourth grader.
He started when he was only 40 years old.
And this is his last achievement.
Thank you.
Grab a Snickers, it's going to be a while.
I'm going to go for this one.
Okay.
My name is Brandi Wiberly and I'm the current director of SPARC's Ignite Afterschool Enrichment Program.
I can also verify that we have black students because I'm black and I have two black students behind me.
And I just spoke with our enrollment coordinator and we actually have 10 registered African-American families and a lot that declined to state because they're biracial.
Just wanted to put that out there.
So, undeniably, diversity outreach is no simple task.
Santa Clara County is suffering one of the largest income caps in the nation, resulting in a housing crisis and a transient population.
We take the evolution of the population very seriously and are sensitive to the disenfranchised members of our community and are actively pursuing ways of offering SPARK as a choice to all families of socioeconomic and ethnic backgrounds.
We are aware of the disparity in the Latino and underserved students and our outreach task force efforts this year include religious organizations, ethnic markets, public service organizations for low-income families, and Sunnyvale Public Library.
My name is Amira Ardalan and I really think you guys should give Spark Charter School another chance.
I know that we're not the perfect school but I know we can try harder and I know that it is a really good school if you really just look into it.
The first year I joined Spark I had a fantastic experience.
I learned how to design plays and use acting methods from my wonderful teacher Mr. Jay Levin.
I caught up in math so fast because of Miss Abbott and Miss Alex who both have helped me throughout this whole year and helped me catch up from my last school.
I really urge you guys to see Spark Charter Schools potential because I know that they're really that they can make it.
And also I really want my younger brother to have the same opportunities I had.
I want him to succeed.
And ever since my mom worked at Ignite it's helped us a lot.
And we were able to move in a house into a house and.
It's just been really good.
So please give Spark Charter School another chance.
I know that they can try harder.
Thank you.
Hi, my name is Michael, and I'm in first grade, and I'm gonna tell you my experience at Spartan.
Last year, I was in kindergarten, and this year has been great.
My teacher has been so great, I can read first grade level books.
This year, my teacher, Ms.
BJ, taught us about charity.
My charity of choice was Pavlov.
Pavlov is a non-profit child cancer
research organization.
We did a research project on what they do and how we can help.
My mom was able to come to my class and teach us about Marcellus King Jr.
and Nelson Mandela.
Please keep my school open.
Hello my name is Neela Stuchinsky and I am a 7th grade student at Spark Charter School.
I like going to Spark because I feel academically challenged there.
Spark is a place where I feel comfortable to be my crazy but eager to learn self.
People in my class and other classes are very supportive when you're having a rough day or you need help on schoolwork.
Before I came to Spark I didn't look forward to going to school but now I do because work there is fun.
I hope you will approve Spark so that I can attend 8th grade and graduate from my school.
Last but not least, this is a statement that I came up with that expresses how I feel about SPARK.
I went to SPARK expecting to make friends, but instead I made a second family.
Thank you for your consideration.
Members of the State Board of Education, my name is Seetabha Murray.
I am in the fifth grade at Spark Charter.
I like the community at Spark because it feels open and inclusive.
Everyone is friendly.
Another thing I like about Spark is that we use both technology and paper and pencil.
We learn to use these tools efficiently and appropriately.
I really like the projects at Spark.
Every Wednesday for six weeks we have Fine Arts Block where we get to learn how to do an art project we chose ourselves.
A few years ago, we got a plan of playground for the school.
Through the project, we learned letter writing and area and perimeter.
Early this school year, we made arcade games out of cardboard.
We also had a math project about volume where we made paper cities with geometric shapes.
In January, we wrote plays, acted them out, and filmed them.
Finally, we have a period every day to study independently and at our own pace.
With all these reasons, Spark is a fantastic place, and I hope you will support and renew it.
Thank you.
Ken Burt on behalf of the California Teachers Association.
I passed out a summary from EdData.
These two schools are within the same building.
And so you can go ahead and there are sparks.
This has a remarkably different population from the Columbia Middle School.
Now the question is, who are you going to believe?
This is a credibility issue.
It really is.
And I want to tell you why.
The funding is irregular and staff says it is.
And I believe the staff and I believe the district and the county.
The problem about making disincentive for the parents and even though you don't have to sign on the signature.
And the big issue is sort of like the dog ate my homework.
I didn't make my academic progress, but here are all the other excuses.
Now, with the chance of going for a levity member, Williams, I can say this is your opportunity to do it twice in one day.
The credibility issue, I need to finish this point.
The credibility issue relates back to the newspaper article I included.
When these people started, they had a bad incident with molestation.
The reason is they did not do their fingerprint checks
They did not do their fingerprint checks and the TB x-rays.
Anybody that exercises that kind of judgment is a problem.
Good evening both.
My name is Sridhar Raman.
My son is in the kindergarten and I'm a proud parent of as always, I mean as other parent at Sparks School.
I live in North Sandy Vale and my apartment community is almost 600 families and I'm the first family person goes to the district school and no other family goes to any of the district school because of
No good schools are available on the Sunnyvale School District and I live in an apartment where within a mile we can access to all the freeways and within three miles of radius you can access to 100 companies that includes all 10 branded companies like
Apple, Google, or anything.
But still, the neighbors moved out of this community because they didn't have any good schools.
And as of now, I've been up with my word of mouth, and I have converted two other parents who are going to the SPARC school this year, if we renew it.
And as I mentioned to you, SPARC is a young school.
If you feel it needs guidance, guide SPARC.
But please allow the school to grow and flourish.
SPARC school adds so much value to our community.
Our children will be devastated if you take away their beloved school from them.
I earnestly appeal to you to renew the park charter.
Thank you so much.
Hi, my name is Mari Moss.
I have a degree in accountancy.
I'm a state employee.
I work in accounting, and I do work with audits.
I was shocked at the county report about the finances, and we know that is a big concern.
But, you know, finances are only as good as what the financial statements say.
The financial statements tell a story.
I was concerned over the time period in which the expenses that they were examining, the bank balances.
You know, SPARC has a lot of capacity for increasing their funding, including an after-school program that is going to likely that revenues are going to increase, which has not been considered.
We've already mentioned fundraising.
Also, they can make program adjustments.
To me, these demonstrate that there's a definite capacity in actual financial management, not mismanagement.
Thank you.
Good afternoon.
My name is Ashwat Thakirakadu.
My son is a very happy first grader at SPARC.
Here he is in the audience today.
It would be absolutely devastating for us if this school simply disappeared.
Today I want to draw your attention to an important fact concerning diversity.
SPARC is an all-inclusive and diverse school, but it should not be painted negatively for demographic trends that impact Sunnyvale as a whole.
I recently went to the EdData website and looked up demographics for Fairwood, the school that Sunnyvale School District has said offers a comparable program to SPARC.
The record indicates that the number of Hispanic students dropped by 50% from 2012-13 to the 2016-2017 year.
Then I looked up the stats for Vargas Elementary.
For the same time period, the Hispanic enrollment dropped about 35%.
Clearly there are broader demographic trends here and SPARC should not be penalized for this Bay Area trend.
Thank you.
Hello, my name is Karen Gamar.
I'm a member of SPARC's board.
I'm a licensed California attorney and I hold a multiple subject teaching credential.
I'm also a former board member and founder of Discovery Charter School and I have advised staff on SPARC on
since their inception.
I want to reiterate that the SPARK Board has directed staff to remove the parent agreement to volunteer from its application and all of the SPARK documents.
We have never held parents to any commitment to volunteer.
A parent's willingness or ability to volunteer has never affected any student's enrollment.
The only tracking of parent participation is through an annual anonymous survey.
The growth in our enrollment and interest in application demonstrates and contradicts the claim that parent
participation is actually a deterrent.
Our original petition was submitted prior to the amended law regarding parent participation.
We will fully comply with the law as it now stands.
Thank you.
Hello again, my name is Dorota and I'm a mom of Henry.
One of the amazing things about Spark is the fine art blocks.
Classes that they have diverse curriculum, like jewelry making, like elements of art, coding, nature, lab, and rocket launch.
There are just few examples.
The children adore this program and they are always challenged.
To try new things and learn by example Henry loves fab and he is talented and we are blessed that he can participate in it Since he's attending in spark.
He's a very happy in his talent is blooming.
He still need to improve his public speaking That we are happy that the school supports his talent in his development and help him achieve all educational goals
I believe that if he continue with Spark, he could become, for example, a Rembrandt or another Picasso.
And so please, please keep our school open.
Thank you.
Board, Ravel Antonio with the Charter Schools Association.
I want to recognize the challenge that you have before you.
You're being asked to renew a charter school that only has two points of data because they were only approved for a three-year term.
That's a really tough order for you.
But I want to talk about the fact that in the first year that they have data, they were performing really high.
In the second year, they dropped slightly, 3%.
But that is because of the students that weren't there anymore.
So it's a very clear case that they're still performing well.
If you look at their raw test scores, I really wish that there was a discrete analysis of their data and not just an acceptance of what SCOE did.
If there was an actual analysis, you would see that their test scores are still high.
But there's a decline in just one student or two students, depending on the end that you're looking at.
Also, the ACCS formally recommended that this board consider approving this school, and we ask that you do that as well.
Thank you.
Good evening, President Kirst, members of the board, Jerry Simmons.
I'm a partner with the Law Offices of Young, Many, and Core.
We represent SPARC as well as the majority of California's charter schools.
This isn't obviously the first time we've appeared before you, but I think in this case, I have really gotten to know this school and its board very well.
We have worked closely with them on their charter renewal, and I think this particular renewal presents for you some precedent-setting questions, right?
What to do about a school that is approved for less than five years initially, because you really don't have the data points the legislature thought you would have when you came up upon
renewal decision.
The statute specifically says that at renewal you're supposed to consider these data points relating to state assessments after a school has been operational for four years.
This is a school that has not been in operation for four years.
The statute's silent about what you're supposed to do if a renewal comes up before then.
Thank you very much.
With the following speakers, please line up.
Danielle Orovetz, Qian Li, Jaya Gautam, Xiaoxing Mei.
Howard Shepard, Miles Denison, Martha Branch, Jovita Contreras, Laura Stuchinsky, Alexander Zdrajovic, Bill Schuetz, Ashar Khetar, Kennedy Buchner, V. O'Brien, Eric Premack, Janet Bueno, Shashi Gourapasad, Melissa Hassan, Callum Noble, Debbie Alexander, Angela Buchner,
Rich Bueno, David O'Brien, and Angie Choi.
Good afternoon.
My name is Danelle Orovetz, and I am a proud parent of a third grade student at SPARK.
Before coming to SPARK, she absolutely hated school.
We fought about it constantly.
She's a struggling early reader.
And we found in the first grade, she was put into English as a second language remedial reading class.
English is not our second language.
It's our first language.
In grade two, she finally got what she needed in the first grade, but by then she was already very far behind.
I am an active participant in my child's education, and I was not getting any guidance from her teachers at her prior school to support any reading efforts at home.
All this changed at SPART for the third grade.
She now loves going to school.
I have to talk her out of it when she's sick.
She's excited, engaged, and curious again.
Her new teacher recognized her struggles with reading, and they sat down together and made goals for improvement.
And for the first time ever, Allie has actually improved in her reading.
She's no longer at the bottom of the class.
She still has work to do, but she's not at the bottom.
Time.
Thank you.
Hi, my name is Qian, and my son Albert is a first grader in Spark.
Earlier this year, I was planning to donate money to Spark.
I explained to Albert that we are contributing to help Spark through this most difficult time.
So I asked him, so do you want to donate some?
I was just kidding.
I know he is working really hard to save all his pocket money to buy a membership in Prodigy.
It's a game he plays every day on iPad and a very big deal for him.
But to my surprise, he actually said yes.
And he counted his donations.
Precious golden dollars and give them to me and said I like spark I want spark to stay and so today with his permission.
I brought his wallet here I hope I can go home tonight.
Tell him that he is lucky golden dollar really brought him luck.
Thank you so much
Good afternoon, board members.
My name is Jaya Gautam.
This is my daughter's third year in Spark Charter.
Although I've lived in SESD for 20 plus years, this is the first opportunity where one of my kids has gone to a Sunnyvale public school, a local school, literally two minutes away from my house.
Having had the chance to observe my daughter's growth from first to third grade, I'd like to speak to Spark's sound and robust educational program, wherein she performs above the SESD and the state average.
Her teacher also emphasizes projects, teamwork, and SEL skills, which will help her for the rest of her life.
Besides the academic component, SPARC provides PE, music, a second language, a plethora of field trips, and a multitude of community building opportunities.
Another important aspect of school life is building strong friendships and relationships.
My other children have had to go to elementary, middle, and high school in different cities, and I've lost out on this.
This is the only K-8 school in Spark, in Sunnyvale, and I hope that you will renew it.
Thank you so much.
Hi, my name is Xiaosheng and I'm the parent of my son goes to kinder at SPARC.
Having a stronger parental presence on campus is having a very positive influence on both Columbia students as well as SPARC students.
Parents watch over students during the lunchtime and pick up the trash left behind by both Columbia and SPARC students.
And also when passing through the halls, when Columbia students and when they see parents approaching or SPARC students approaching, they behave better.
And I think that this kind of interaction between the SPARC students, also Columbia students, need a very positive influence.
Time.
Thank you.
Good afternoon.
My name's Howard Shepard.
I'm a SPARC parent.
The county has stated that the SPARC was
the only three-year charter it has denied out of 14 granted since 2003.
That statement needs context.
In 2012, the county had a pro-charter reputation.
The vast majority of the three-year charters the county voted to renew occurred before 2012.
The board balance began to shift after that year.
Since then, the council has approved three-year charters.
All new schools have existing charter school management associations.
SPARC was the only one denied of that foursome.
It was also the only non-CMO three-year charter renewal considered.
We toured all of the Sunnyvale's programme of choice schools.
Overall, we were unimpressed by the school's academic standards and lack of enthusiasm.
Hi, good afternoon.
Myles Deniston, Charter School Management Corporation.
We assist SPARC with financial matters.
I just want to emphasize one point, which is SPARC grew 35% in its 16-17 grades.
In other words, the grades that served in 16-17.
As was mentioned as background, one of your waiver items, when that happens, you actually get $0 for those additional kids until starting in March of this year.
So any, and given that the average district only has a 15-20% reserve, the average district throughout the states, the majority of districts throughout the state would not be able to handle that kind of cash flow delay.
So that is why SPARC had to have a little bit of cash flow assistance, three-quarters of which was only a two-month cash flow assistance.
And then the last 25% was about six-month cash flow assistance and has been paid back.
I also want to mention that there was quite a bit of wrong data in the county's report and so we'll be handing out the actual revenues and expenses and assets and liabilities as a handout to all of you.
Thank you.
Good afternoon.
Thank you for all you do.
My name is Martha Branch, Chief Business Officer at Spark.
I'm here to address two points from the CDE staff financial report.
Number one is local revenue.
Like Spark, CDE staff recognizes the expenses.
to run our aftercare program and our fundraising efforts.
However, what's missing from the staff report is the income that both these programs generated.
If staff excludes local revenue, then they also must exclude the associated expenses.
Number two, the Charter Loan Fund Program.
Staff report incorrectly calculated the loan as a three-year loan.
The documents that we provided in our petition clearly show a five-year loan.
We built a CDE-like five-year budget where we removed the aftercare expenses and reconfigured the loan.
And we have evidence that we can demonstrate financial viability.
Thank you so much.
Good afternoon all members.
I just want to thank you for giving us this opportunity.
Yeah, I apologize.
I always get really sensitive when I talk about this.
I have always gone to all the meetings in San Jose because this school is very important for me.
And for my son, Guillermo.
Because I saw him suffer.
Kindergarten, then first grade.
Because he's not an average kid.
He has ADD.
And he suffered.
Even though for my daughter, Fairwood was wonderful, not for my son Guillermo.
My mom would have to call me sometimes and I have to leave work so I can take him to school.
But he will cry and cry all the time.
And now he loves Sparks.
So please renew Sparks.
Can you please state your name for the record before you leave?
Sorry, Jovita Contreras.
My name is Laura Suchinski.
I'm a board member of SPARC and a founder.
SPARC is committed to serving all members of our community, particularly those who are historically underserved.
We have a robust outreach program and have added a free and reduced lunch preference to our lottery.
This year, twice as many free and reduced program eligible students participated in our lottery compared to the number of currently enrolled.
Clearly, our outreach efforts are working.
Next year, if we're renewed, those students will be guaranteed a spot at our school.
SPARC also meets the state legal requirement that we reflect the general population living in the district, not the population attending the district schools.
SPARC's Asian and Latino population are proportionally similar to the general population on the north side, while the district schools have far more Latino students and far less Asian students.
SPARK and the district have fewer white students proportionally than the general population, but the gap is much wider for the district.
In short, many white and Asian students are choosing not to attend the district schools.
That should not be held against SPARK.
Dear board members, I'm Alexandra Strachowicz, 7th and 8th grade math teacher at SPARC.
My point is that it is unsound to use CASP data to evaluate a small, lower-grade, heavy school like ours with only two data points.
Our CASP population in the second year has 24 students who entered 3rd grade, 16 new students, and 33 returning students.
40 new students are added to the initial CASP pool of 33 students.
The academic level of these 40 students can significantly increase or decrease second year CASP results.
So CASP does not give a true picture of student achievement.
After two and a half years, internal assessments are more reliable to measure academic success.
They happen three times a year.
They assess all students.
Sparks internal assessments until winter 2018 show strong progress for all students and subgroups.
Please consider our internal assessment results to arrive at your conclusion for the criteria of sound educational practice.
Thank you for listening.
Hi, my name is Ashish Ashtekar.
I'm a parent of a first grader, as well as the chairperson for fundraising at Spark.
Spark had a very successful 2017-18 fundraising year.
Our total for 17-18 exceeded $230,000 and comprised of highly diversified streams of revenue, such as individual donations, corporate matching, grants, events, and campaigns.
Spark parents willingly, willingly donated and encouraged friends and family to donate as well.
SPARC has built a talented fundraising team that can systematically execute multi-year targets to achieve repeatable success.
We also understand the need to scale up or scale down as situation demands.
This year we scaled up our fundraising to do more than 2x to pay off one-time charter renewal costs and or allocation bills.
We look forward to your support in getting SPARC renewed.
Thank you.
Hello, my name is QV.
And mine is Kennedy.
And we are both students in fifth grade.
SPARK has made it fun and easy to learn for both of us because of project-based learning.
Project-based learning lets us do hands-on activities, which involves us to do critical thinking and tackle real-world problems.
Academically, project-based learning helps teach mathematics, science, history, and English in an engaging way.
An example is when the fifth grade class had to split into teams and had to open up locks with clues to open a box.
The clues used common sense, teamwork, and math to unlock them.
Before I went to SPARK, I would get bored often, and my teachers weren't helping me very well.
It was hard for me to push myself and to learn at my speed.
At my old school, everything was individual, and I wasn't able to learn any social skills.
But at SPARK, we were able to challenge ourselves and to persevere.
Our teacher would do one-on-one meetings to check on how we were doing.
Sometimes our teacher would give us problems too hard to solve ourselves.
If that happens, we are able to work together to find the answer.
Me and Vy have done multiple projects together, such as comparing and contrasting different stories in the history of the 13 colonies.
As students at SPARK, we believe that as a family, community, and school, SPARK should stay for years to come.
We hope that you will consider this.
Thank you.
Good evening President Kirsten, board members.
My name is Bill Schutz.
I'm legal counsel for Sunnyvale School District.
As the Gordon Wilson v. State Board of Education stated in upholding the Charter Schools Act, charter schools promise academic results in return for freedom from bureaucracy.
Academic accountability is a cornerstone to the act and the legislature made academic performance the most important factor when considering renewal.
Specifically, as you know, Ed Code 47607 requires the granting authority to consider increases in academic performance achievement as the most important factor.
It is not within the discretion of the State Board to ignore SPARC's significant academic decreases in ELA and math as laid out by the Santa Clara County Office of Ed and the California Department of Education.
Decreases that disproportionately impact minority students.
Because SPARC did not meet the foundational requirement to increase academic performance for all subgroups and in light of the operational deficiencies identified by CDE, SPARC is not eligible for renewal.
Therefore, we respectfully request the State Board of Education accept CDE's staff's recommendation to deny the renewal.
Thank you.
Good afternoon board members.
My name is Janet Bueno and I am mom of a first grader as well as PTO president and co-chair of events.
I do volunteer quite a bit.
Parent participation is an opportunity for us to be part of our child's school life while at the same time allowing us to gain valuable skills that will aid in our child's development.
Parents that volunteer or participate in classes do so.
We choose to do that.
We do not to do it because of pressure.
I have never, ever once felt the pressure to volunteer, but only get the benefit from it.
Various research studies over the last two plus decades show that parent involvement is a powerful and positive factor that not only influences how well children will do, but how far they will take their education.
SPARK creates a culture of diversity and inclusivity that is palpable in our classrooms as well as our halls.
Parents and teachers unify our efforts to keep this at the forefront.
It is the essence and the heart of our school and our community.
Thank you so much.
Please vote to renew us.
Dear California State Board of Education, my name is Shashi Gurprasad, parent of a third grader.
Looking at this park renewal proceedings at the county, the following analogy comes to my mind.
A doctor who wrongly diagnoses that a patient is terminally sick, even though the patient is healthy, decides to kill the patient to save the patient and others from pain.
It doesn't make sense to me.
It doesn't make sense to you guys either.
So SPARC is a very strong school on all accounts.
Please renew SPARC and help us reach greater heights than before.
Thank you.
Good evening.
My name is Melissa Haasen.
I've been a teacher at SPARK since it opened in 2015.
I'm here to talk a little bit about the turnover that SPARK has experienced.
As Brandy stated, high housing prices impact both the teachers and the student families at SPARK.
SPARC staff, however, has decided to implement an exit survey for families that choose not to enroll in order to better understand how SPARC can better understand all stakeholders.
This year, SPARC received a SUMS grant to implement a multi-tiered system of supports.
We are engaged in building structural capacity and in aligning our systems to support the teaching staff, the students, and the families in our SPARC community.
We know that we have not been perfect and we are well aware of how much better we can be, so please give us the opportunity to show how well we can do.
Thank you.
Hello, my name is Callum Noble, parent at Spark Charter School.
We're all here for one goal, the safety of our children.
Yes, we've had some unthinkable actions happen regarding a child predator and an intoxicated teacher.
In both cases, Spark handled the situation quickly and swiftly with termination of the staff and full communication with police and parents.
The child predator was 18 years of age with no prior knowledge, signs or records of them being a child predator.
Alcoholism is a disease and happens in every profession.
SPARC requires thorough background checks, including live scan, which is above the standard for all staff and parents volunteering.
The safety of our children comes first, and if the other parents here today supporting SPARC did not think it was safe for our children, we would not be here.
I ask for your support to help SPARC and vote yes on our renewal.
Thank you.
Good evening, my name is Debbie Alexander.
I'm a parent of a kindergartner at Spark and I wanted to talk a little about ADA.
So Spark has been able to forecast its total ADA correctly.
However, there has been a significant problem with the Sunnyvale School District's classroom loaning calculations.
So SPARC has asked for the district loading factors multiple times, but these numbers have never been provided to SPARC and never been fully disclosed.
In fact, SPARC has had to submit public records requests in order to get an inkling of these numbers.
And so using the numbers that we have found through the public records, SPARC actually has fewer classrooms and less space than other district schools.
SPARC is under allocated.
We're not over allocated.
It doesn't have a multi-purpose room.
Our students eat and pee in the classrooms, even if it rains.
They do science, arts, music, and theater in the classrooms or outside, whether it rains or not.
SPARC is paying the extra rent or over allocation fees, even though it doesn't have enough space.
And also, it's really inequitable for Sunnyvale taxpayers' time to different standards than the district schools.
Hi, my name is Angela Buckner, and I am a second-year parent at SPARK.
Before choosing SPARK, I analyzed all the test data on grade schools and talked to a lot of parents.
SPARK outperformed our local school and was the only public K-3 option in Sunnyvale.
Initially, we were concerned about the parent volunteering aspect at SPARK, but also at the district-run Fairwood Explorer.
It's also a parent participation school.
And at least when we went to our information session, Principal Mahoney, Director Mahoney, made it very clear that it wasn't a requirement.
Anything that our family would do is fine.
It's not required.
Just enroll.
Just come.
There's no tracking or pressure or enforcement.
And my kids weren't treated differently because we couldn't volunteer.
Both my husband and I worked.
In general, there's a core group of volunteers that I am very grateful for because they love helping the children at school and my kids love them.
My children are showing strong academic growth at SPARK and I'm really struggling to understand why any government body would shut down a performing school and force kids to go to a North Sunnyvale school that is scoring below state average for all ethnic groups.
Please renew SPARK.
Good afternoon.
Demographics can be difficult and frustrating as they depend on self-identification, statistics, labels, and frankly can feel like an invasion of privacy.
My own mixed-race child is one of the many declined to states.
I could have chosen to list them under their minority label, but I, like many of our parents, don't care to label our children like this.
I know of other mixed-race children, including African-American,
but their parents also did not choose to label their racial background.
We also have a significant Middle Eastern population, but they're a white statistic.
SPARC cares deeply about diversity and has a racially diverse and also religiously diverse student body.
Unfortunately, some government ways of measuring this does not give this true picture of our demographics.
Thank you very much.
Hello, everyone.
We are all here to accomplish one goal, academic triumph.
SPARK community is here to achieve that goal for our kids.
Today's kids are unique and diverse.
They need to have a unique and diverse school that understands them and help their learning to excel.
SPARC believes in our kids.
SPARC challenges our kids.
My son started at a different school last year.
He was obviously struggling.
Even though the school had started, we accepted the offer from SPARC and knew it was a tough but the right choice.
We could see immediately improvement in academic teaching and SEL.
with Tristan.
He really likes going to school here.
Spark wants to lead the academic triumph.
Help us make Spark a model school and others to follow.
Thank you.
Eric Premack, Charter School Center.
This case is kind of a textbook example of at least a few things.
Number one, it's really a bad idea to grant a charter with only a three-year term because it just gives you very little to go on.
Number two, it's a textbook example.
Board Member Velde is going back to the discussion of growth about why we need a growth metric.
When you rely on the standard CASP data as
the county and CDE staff have done, you can end up with a very misleading picture that looks like a decline when in fact you're demonstrating growth.
What we also see here is a textbook example of the typical cash flow challenges that a startup charter school has.
The cash comes in after the fact and almost every charter school that we work with, except for the ones that are bankrolled by the billionaires,
end up having to sell their receivables and borrow money.
And it's a tough slog.
And it takes, you know, four, five, six years to get out of that.
And this school is exactly where you would expect it to be and is sustainable.
And so for those reasons, we hope that you'll think carefully about what's in front of you and approve this one.
Thank you.
Okay, state board members.
I am Mayuri Vasireddy, a founding parent and current board member at SPARC.
I would like to address some transparency and communication issues regarding SPARC's financials.
SPARC has always been transparent with financials.
Every short-term loan was reported in the summary submitted to the county in accordance with the MOU.
Our allocation fees estimates based on our enrollment have been reported and have been accounted for in every budget.
SPARC did not receive any negative feedback from county staff about SPARC's budget.
until the renewal meetings, even though SPARC has actively stayed in touch with the county staff.
SPARC wonders when the disconnect is.
There has been significant staff turnover at the county.
SPARC has worked with three different financial staff in the three years of our existence.
Please consider SPARC's consistency in financial transparency as you make this decision today.
Thank you.
Hi, I'm Angie Choi.
Learning about how SPARK came to be, I am so impressed by the founding and present board members for their passion in providing excellent education for all.
SPARK has received criticism on its financial viability and test scores, but I urge you to consider that year three is the year where all charter schools, sorry,
have the biggest strain on financials due to increases in attendance and startup grants drying up.
We, however, have demonstrated that we strongly managed our budget in face of that.
Please also remember that with only two data points for test scores, one cannot make a clear evaluation on progress.
The fact is that SPARC has shown clear progress in individual students who have a newfound ability and love for academic and social emotional learning after coming to SPARC.
SPARC has a strong, dedicated administration, supporting happy students, and a loving community that appears before you today.
Please don't deny us the chance to flourish.
Please vote yes.
Thank you for your time, your patience, and your hard work today.
Okay, I think that, does that complete the public testimony?
It does, okay.
I think we're ready now for board discussion.
The liaisons want to start?
Oh, I'm declaring the public hearing closed.
Well, yes, okay.
I do have some questions.
The petitioner, if she could come back up, please.
I do have some questions for clarification.
You talked about this.
changeover in the school population because they rejected this 5-6-7 combined class.
Were they not aware when they enrolled that this was going to be a combined course?
Was this a surprise somehow?
I don't understand.
So basically the year one of our school, on the first year of our school, we had only one combination class, which was 5-6.
And year two, by the time we got our Prop 39 final offer, we did not get the adequate number of classrooms.
So we actually had to have five, six, and seven in one extra large classroom.
And that is not something that a lot of parents would like.
You have three different grade levels in one physical classroom.
A lot of our parents were not happy about that in those grades.
So yes.
It wasn't a combined curriculum.
It was a combined space.
Yes, absolutely.
It was not a combined curriculum.
I didn't understand that.
Yeah.
You know, I do fully understand how difficult starting up a charter school can be in terms of money and cash flow and all that.
I heard about individual loans, personal loans from board members to the school.
Were those documented?
Did you have a paper trail with
An agreement where the money would be paid back by a certain time, you know, if there was any interest or no interest or... Yes, it was an interest-free loan.
In fact, I was one of the board members who also gave that loan.
And we have formal paperwork for it as well, when the loan will be paid back, timelines, time with when the reimbursements would be coming back.
Yes.
I'm not sure that the CDE was able to find that information, but yeah.
So you said several times today, and I think you said at the ACCS meeting also, that there's no pressure put on parents to participate.
You want to encourage parent engagement.
It is not
in any way, shape or form, a requirement.
But what I don't understand is how, if it's just encouragement, if it's just trying to get parent participation, that your expectations of parents and the volunteer guide are so detailed and specific.
Do this, do this, do this, do this, donate this.
Why is it so specific if all you're doing is saying we just want you to engage if you can?
I think when we started the school, it was based on a philosophy compared to some of the other similar charter schools and like district school as well, like other magnet programs that offered a parent participation.
But as a school, so we just adopted that language as is, without, you know, we do want parents, you know, but willingfully, you know, without, like for instance, we've never gone back and looked at
Who has signed that who hasn't signed that you know what they have committed to or not committed to there is like.
We want to encourage but yeah I would I do understand that there are concerns and.
And we are absolutely OK with not having that language we are absolutely comfortable and we've.
We've been very accepting of any family who did not want to even sign that.
There was just absolutely no consequence.
Right, and I worked on the document that you're referring to with another parent, and a big part of where that came from was
from current families, current parents who are volunteering, who are giving feedback that they didn't have clear information on what they could be doing, how they could be volunteering, and so they wanted some additional specifics.
And so part of this was in response to current families trying to give them that level of specificity.
When I run my information sessions and talk to prospective families,
I don't bring that up.
I don't talk about those requirements.
And in fact, I've never referred to that.
When the charter was first created with the previous law, they had sort of different parameters.
And so that was what was built into the charter.
However,
And since I've been there in the last two and a half years, one of my foundational beliefs is that volunteering should be voluntary, and that it will only enhance the community if you're willingly doing it.
And I make it very clear that it should not, and I just say it should not be a barrier to entry.
I hear you.
Thanks.
Also, what specific activities have you undertaken, say, within the last six months to reach out to a broader diversity of families in the area to
changed this current demographic that you have, which there are people who are not interested in divulging a race or a minority or whatever.
But still, there's quite a difference here between your population and the middle school that you live with, for example, in the whole community.
One of the pieces that is quite different are the number of free and reduced lunch
That's a significant difference in your population.
So what specifically have you done in the last six months or so to address that situation?
So in terms of our outreach, we've been doing consistently the same outreach for the last three years.
I've myself stood outside all of those ethnic stores and handed out
flyers in Spanish, recruited parents who are Spanish-speaking parents to attract more families.
But I think what I recognized is that despite doing this aggressive outreach, the thing that seems to be working most is the word of mouth.
That's how we are gaining our enrollment.
And that's why we strongly felt that if we make the
make the enrollment preference change by giving a higher priority to free and reduced lunch population, that will, once those students start to come in, they will get in more students.
And that's how I feel like we'll be able to better achieve and close that gap in our, in our demo.
And that's the action we took.
We have made a change in our petition, and we can only do a material revision change whenever there is an enrollment preference change.
And we are really hoping that after we get renewed, that is going to go into effect, that will go into effect.
Thank you.
I have one question for the district or county.
Yeah.
In fact, I'd like the district and county to come up and we had a parade of witnesses on the other side.
We've had two people talk from the district and the county.
They were cut off after 10 minutes.
So I'd like to have them come up, make any statements they want to in rebuttal here.
I have some comments as well.
And then
But you can ask your first question since you have the floor.
And then I want to have a chance here to comment on this.
Can I first of all say, I apologize for not thanking you for your time.
I think I got cut off.
I wasn't expecting to be done.
I budgeted my time and just ran over.
So thank you so much for your time.
No problem.
Sir, from the district.
The
The financial ups and downs that you've witnessed this school have over the last couple of years and your concerns and your fears and all, what steps did you take to not help them with the situation, but to express your concern, to make sure they understood, had at least the help from you that would say, guys, do you understand what's going on here?
Actually, we're not the oversight agency, so it's the county office that, yeah.
I'm sorry, I got confused there.
Then you're off the hook.
You're off the hook.
I'm on the hot seat.
Okay, would you please... I'm Christine Carbone, the Financial Administrator for Charter Schools for Santa Clara Office of Education.
It was very difficult to find the financial problems.
They had taken their short-term loans, which were the factoring loans, and they had put them into long-term loans.
So, I can only go on what they tell me.
So, therefore, I assume that these were startup loans.
other type of loans.
When I started digging into it was when they, last year, they had done two loans from board members.
And we had talked to them and said, that's not appropriate.
You need to let us know.
So in December, December 7th, they called and they told us, we have another loan from a board member.
I said, do you have the papers?
Do you have the board resolution, the minutes?
And then jokingly, I said, do you have any other loans out?
And that's when it came out that they were selling their LCFF revenue.
So at that point, I went back and I looked at all of their finances for the months.
We get their monthly bank statements, looking at their bank statements, looking at the balance sheets they had given us every month, and researching this and found out that this had been going on since
they opened in October 2015.
So after beating myself up for not seeing it and realizing it, was when we started talking to them and saying, there's a concern here.
We don't think you can make it to the end of the year.
And that's what led to this.
So they even admitted to us
that before the donations came pouring in and they started that effort, that they would have to take another loan before the end of the school year.
Excuse me.
Also, sir, you had asked for the loan document.
I have the most recent one right here, if you'd like to see it.
Do I need to make copies for everyone?
No.
Would you like to see it?
Oh, OK.
So I'd like to, as long as you people are up there, what comments you would have.
I'll start with Superintendent Picard, just to ask a question.
You're a basic aid district.
Basic aid means you run on your own property tax.
There are basic aid districts all around me.
They have inspectors that look for addresses of people who are coming over their borders and then they extrude them.
So, your financial incentives aren't the same, it seems to me, as this loss of enrollment because the districts around me, they want to get rid of the enrollment and it runs up their per-pupil expenditure.
So, there was accusations about win-lose and I don't understand it.
No, it really doesn't impact us a great deal financially.
The concerns I expressed earlier are the concerns I have.
I haven't been observant of their financial situation only through information I've heard through these public hearings.
Okay.
And then... We haven't put any challenges.
The only thing, the only request we've made of the Spark Charter School is residency verification for all of their students so that we know for which students we are to support and for which students we should seek support from our neighboring schools, district, other school districts.
And would the county like to, would you like to add anything to or any comments you want to make, county officials?
about what you heard?
Can I just ask a question?
Sure.
Looking at the loan document now, it says it's a short-term loan to be paid back on or before April 15, 2018, which in some ways, to me, affirms a little bit of what Eric Premack was talking about, and also their financial officer, that charter schools are victims of cash flow issues, particularly in the early first years.
And so, at least just reading this again on the face of it, it looks like they needed a short-term loan until they were gonna get their apportionment, and it got paid off.
So I'm wondering about whether or not there's evidence of a greater structural imbalance, meaning that when they're all the way up and running and they're at their enrollment targets, will the revenues that come in from their enrollment
Projections match their expenditures or is there a structural deficit?
I could only tell you how other Standalone charters have worked in our district and that is they take a year or two and build up the reserves before they start Expanding so therefore when they expand they have enough to keep the 4% reserves that we require There there and yet cover them through that nine month period until March Spark did not do that
Michelle Johnson for the county office.
I'd also like to reiterate that there have been lots of questions about the multiple data points and about the academic achievement.
We're only able to look at the academic achievement that is presented to us in the petition.
So the additional data points that have been brought up that were brought to the ACCS and to you now saying, look, this is where we're now at.
were not available or presented to us.
And we had been requesting since a year ago, right before the renewal, please paint the picture.
Please give us data.
Help us help you become renewed.
And so it's been a fight to get the information that we've been requesting.
Because that does raise a question for me, which I'm confused about.
As I read the statute, it does say that you're supposed to, that a charter is supposed to be in operation for four years before you consider test scores, essentially.
They say it a little bit differently.
But I hear two very different interpretations of what's happening here.
The county, it seems like you're using the test scores just on a year-over-year basis, which as I read the statute is not appropriate.
The district or the charter is saying, no, we need to have four years.
We have this alternative data.
Here's the alternative data.
This is the way we demonstrate.
And they do a cohort analysis.
So I'm just confused about who's interpreting the law.
And the department is also, in my view, interpreting it the same way the county did.
Help me understand what's going on here.
So with regards to the law and what is required, the law does state that you must have academic increases for all subgroups.
That is outside of the four-year requirement.
So you still have to show academic increases.
And so when we're looking at the totality of the circumstances across academic increases, you still see that those aren't happening.
OK.
Eileen Strauss is next.
So I had some questions for the county presentation.
And I guess my first comment is, you know, I so appreciate the parents and the kids, the students coming and listening and
You know, it brings my heart as a parent and a grandparent for wanting a really wonderful school that my kids feel safe and they feel like they're learning.
And I also hear the passion for the board and the leaders who have facilitated the development of the school.
And I understand it's early.
It brought up a couple of points for me.
that I'm not reconciling in my own mind.
And so that's what I'd like.
And I'd like the county to clarify.
And you had some data that we didn't get to see.
So this is the areas that I'm concerned about.
The ethnic student ratio didn't appear to be in alignment and not close even.
I'd like you to share a little more data about that from the county perspective.
And then also,
The continuous, I'm concerned about the loans and the cash over time.
It seems to me that the budgeting process, I understand startup is really hard, but I guess I'd like a little bit more context and understanding if there was more that you could share on that part.
I guess that's areas I'd like to start with, just for some more clarification.
Those are areas that I had some concerns about.
Okay, there were a couple of things that were brought to my attention when you spoke.
I want to first and foremost say that we've done aggressive intervention early on trying to make sure that we could support the schools.
Well before the petition was submitted, there was offerings from our on our staff's behalf to help support and make sure that we could get everything in check.
So I just want you to know the decision was not made lightly.
We understand the impact.
We're very compassionate as educators, but we also are fulfilling our obligation.
And so that's how we came up with the decision, the recommendation, and then, of course, the decision from the board.
You asked a couple of questions.
I just wanted to hit upon that one.
Our demographics.
You know, I could just tell you what was on that last slide that we had.
It was echoed basically what was said by CDE.
In the era of racial and ethnic balance, SPARC provided this initial information showing a fairly similar demographic to the population of Sunnyvale and Sunnyvale School District as a whole.
However, the issue is not whether SPARC's demographics match the district as a whole, but whether they are comparable to the schools in which SPARC students would otherwise have attended.
These demographics show a completely different scenario.
SPARC is now significantly skewed in the areas of white and Asian versus Filipino, Hispanic and Latino.
So that echoes somewhat of what the CDE had also found.
And you have to refresh me on the next question you had.
Yeah, the fundraising and budget issues.
I mean, I understand the other, the business person also you shared, but the budgeting is just such a concern because it seems like they're spending more and more and having less and less income.
So just anything that will, this is a really difficult decision.
You've got numbers and you've got kids and their lives and where they're going to go to school.
So, I mean, again, anything else that you can share to help us understand the financial challenges and what you were able to
uncover in the recommendation.
And I'm going to ask Christine, our financial administrator, to come up in a second.
But I do want to say, again, part of our commitment has always been to all the schools that we are authorized in monitoring and oversight is to provide intervention as timely as possible.
And this also was part of the fiscal oversight.
We have another financial administrator who works, who early on provided direction and provided support and offered to continue to provide support.
And so, unfortunately, things did not work out as we had hoped.
And at this point, I'll turn it over to my financial administrator.
Hi, Christine Carbone again.
First of all, I want to say that this was not an easy decision for us.
From a financial standpoint, I went over the numbers every which way, gave them every single advantage I possibly could.
I had my co-worker who works with me as a financial administrator rerun the numbers.
This has been worked and massaged as much as possible.
What I've done is I actually use their actuals until the first, the second interim.
And from there, I went and I used what the first, the second interim had for their cash flow.
And so I don't know if you're going to be able to see this, but these are their monthly expenses.
And you can see here that they're in the negative.
And then here you can see is their equity to debt.
If they were to sell everything, everything they have, take all the money out of their bank, any assets they have, they would still be in the negative of $216,000 at the end of the year.
The year being the end of this fiscal year.
So they would start the beginning of the school year with a negative cash balance.
I'm worried.
Member Rucker's next.
OK, so I have questions for both the district and the county.
I'll start with the district representative first.
Do you have other charter schools in your district?
We just have one within our boundaries, Summit Academy.
And have you done a charter renewal with that particular?
They're a county charter.
Okay.
They're located in our district.
All right.
So there's not, you, so let me react, let me ask the question differently.
Are there charters in your district that you've actually authorized?
No.
But for the chart, but there is, there are charters that have been authorized by the county in your district.
I want to make sure I heard you say correct, correctly that I heard you say that you have, would you say that you have
a collegial or collaborative relationship with the charter that's in your district?
We do with Summit Academy.
Okay.
But there's a difficulty with the relationship you have with this charter that's co-located at one of your school sites.
I now have a question for the charter, the county office.
Are there other charters that you have authorized in your county?
Oh, absolutely.
We have 23.
But if you want to go back to talk about how many we have for three years, because I do believe that was something that was... That's where I'm headed.
Yes, that's where I'm headed.
We have 51 charters approved since 2003.
14 received an initial three year term.
This is the only only charter school that received three year term that we that the board decided not to renew.
All right.
Well, let me.
OK.
Well, thank you very much for that.
But let me ask my question.
I'm sorry.
You know, when he asked about.
Did I have anything to cover?
And I do want to talk a little bit about this three year thing, because you did say you have other charters in your county that have been authorized for three years.
Correct.
And are you.
Did I just.
For those other schools, did they have the kind of fiscal or cash flow problems that I'm hearing from Eric Premack is a characteristic for startup charters?
Do they have these kind of problems?
I'm going to again defer to my financial administrator because I am not aware of there being any outstanding problems that prohibited them from being renewed.
If they had had major problems of this nature, I'm quite confident that they would have been up.
Okay, so I'll let her answer that, but then I have some other questions for you on the three-year piece.
Hi, Christine Carbone again.
Yes, actually, when this happened, this is one of the ways that I wanted to justify what was happening to them.
I went back and I looked at our schools that are standalones and what they did in their first three years.
And what they did was exactly what I had just said, is that they had saved their money and then expanded.
Yes, there were times when it was crunch time and, you know, for them, but looking at their past financials, it was nothing compared to this.
Okay.
Thank you.
And have you done any renewals for these other charters that had the initial three-year upper observation?
Yes, we have.
And when you made the decision to do the renewal, was the academic information that you had, did you have sufficient academic information?
Absolutely.
And for the performance of those students, were you actually able to have enough evidence about the performance of those subgroups to make a determination?
It was absolutely acceptable and certainly by our board.
So, yes, we did.
So while I understand from the charter that there's problems with the way the information is presented from the dashboard, the other elements in the statute do require the authorizer to also look at the performance of the subgroups.
Was the sub, for the subgroups that are at these schools, is the performance that's required under the statute for these subgroups, did they meet that requirement?
David, can I ask you to come up?
David Wong, Administrator for Santa Clara.
Yes, they did.
We took a look at, you're asking the question about in terms of for the other charter school that we recommended approval.
In fact, that school did not have any SBAC scores because it was a K-2 school.
What we took a look at what was provided to us year over year from year one
their own internal assessments, which were teacher-made, and they also had their own independent formative assessments.
They were able to give us those two kind of assessments across time.
And then we took a look at in terms of, you know, for subgroups.
because it was a dual immersion program.
We took a look at in terms of students as they progress in English.
We also took a look at the students as they progress in their primary language.
They were able to produce all those results in a very systematic, coherent manner.
We really could see that they really paid attention to student performance across time.
Okay.
And then I'll ask you, and I lost the number, how many schools did you say you initially authorized that had this three-year period
We had 14 that received three year.
OK, so then I want to ask you the question about this particular charter school and their subgroup performance.
All right.
Can you what can you tell me about for the SPARC charter about their academic information, particularly the subgroup students, the student subgroup performance?
Well, they had.
With regards to their subgroups, significant declines in English language learners,
in Asian and in Hispanic.
And what does the statute require?
Academic increases in all subgroups.
And these, and again, for the other charters that you've done that had the three-year initial authorization, you were able to renew them and they met that requirement.
Yes.
Okay.
So, thank you.
Thank you very much.
That's very helpful.
Board Member Valdez.
I just have a question for County.
As you're doing oversight, so as the authorizer, I'm sure it must be difficult because you have so many charters that you have to.
And so I kind of want to understand your system.
At what point did you know there was a problem?
So is it first interim or was it a year ago at first interim?
And what have been the conversations along the way in terms of your support as the oversight agency to help them get better at their finances?
A little bit about our support structure.
We are a seven person team.
We have an administrative assistant as well.
And so we have divided up the schools accordingly.
So we have a financial administrator and then we have the other three administrators that assume responsibilities.
And so we work collaboratively as a team and fill in and do follow up on Mondays when we have our meetings if there are any identified areas.
In terms of financial review, we have protocols.
We've all been CARSnet trained and NACSA.
We've all done all the training, so we do have a very consistent practice when we're doing oversight for all schools.
And we do our site reviews, not only the annual reviews, but we also go sporadically, drop in to visit.
We have them participate in our ongoing trainings during the course of the year at least three times.
and some of that has also been for fiscal oversight.
And so we are adhering to whatever needs are expressed to us and those that we have identified by our charter schools and we structure activities and trainings accordingly.
Do you ask your charter schools to use like for example in Riverside County we use Galaxy.
So when we did an authorization the charter school that was under us used Galaxy.
So we had access and we could see do you have anything like that as a system for oversight?
No, I think there is another program called... Yeah, okay.
Just fill me in about the monthlies that we do get for.
Thank you.
Okay, any more questions?
I'm sure we'll want to express our views on this, but we could get a motion now and then talk about how we feel about this.
I know I have some feelings.
Well, this three-year thing really troubles me.
I mean, we're asked to override a local decision without sufficient data.
And the back and forth of the conversation here has, you know, to me not been an overwhelming case to override the local decision given that I don't have much hard data.
So I, you know, that we should be at the state level, we should have better data.
And legal counsel, we have to hear these things after three years or two years?
I'm asking because we're at a high level here and trying to figure all this out in a very uncertain atmosphere.
At the initial term, an authorizer, including any authorizer, has the option of renewing for less than five years.
When they come up for renewal, then it shall be for five years.
So, yes.
So,
It's just, it seems to me, my feeling is it has to be a really compelling case when you're, when it's so early in the evolution of it, there's so many questions about it to override the local decision.
When we have five years, we have a lot of data and we know a lot of what's going on.
But we do have some data.
This is a county office that has experience working with charter schools that have this initial three-year authorization, that have a very collaborative relationship with those charters, that have a very good track record of monitoring those charters, that have been able to renew those charters with three years of data, and those charters comparing their
their governance structure, their fiscal management, as well as their academic development for their students.
For those other charters in this county, from the data that's been presented, those charters have been markedly more successful than this one.
And given the information about the performance of their student subgroups, they have not done as well in implementing a successful plan to support the academic development of those student subgroups as those other charters that have been authorized for just three years.
So even if we're looking at sparse data based on the performance of this charter for three years, there are 14 other charters in this county that had a similar authorization, that had similar performance expectations, that had a similar collaborative relationship oversight monitoring from a single authorizer, and this one out of all of them
have marked problems that are, I'm going to say unique to that charter, but are unique to the circumstances in a county office where authorizing charters for a period of three years is really a norm and they know what they're doing.
So, we have clear data that the authorizer knows what they're doing.
Fourteen other charters with three years of authorization that knew what they were doing and here's one that clearly doesn't.
Other board comments?
We've had two of us.
Are we ready for a motion?
I don't know.
I tend to be late and I'm tired.
And I get it.
With a three year term charter, you have got to be on it.
Day one on it.
And I think the mistake perhaps that was made here was that they weren't,
This kind of got, they got caught in this.
Because what I'm hearing as far as the issues is typical of a startup charter school.
I don't think that they made such drastic mistakes.
It was typical of a startup.
But if you have a three-year term, you have to be on it.
And I would, it's difficult for me is,
is the awareness of that.
And I can see that now the school has a community behind it.
It is very, very difficult now to kind of pull it back.
And this is, again, typical of issues that we see with charters that come up here.
And I don't know.
There's a lot of things going on in my head, one of which is we should not be... I mean, we...
I just don't believe that authorizers should be doing three-year charters.
It's just not enough data.
It's not enough time to get to move things and to get a stable school up and going and meeting its mission.
And yeah, I don't know what else to say.
I'm going to like to hear Bruce.
So it is very difficult for us.
In some ways, I do think it's unfair to have a three-year term.
be able to prove themselves with a little more time, a little energy and effort.
But as Member Sung said, you do have to be on it right from the beginning.
You really must be on each and every one of the pieces and understand that it will be very quick, that you will be evaluated on all those.
And unfortunately, I think, and once again, agreeing with Member Song, the mistakes that were made were not malicious.
They were not intended to be sneaky or conniving or to their advantage in some way.
I really just think they probably didn't
quite understand some of the realities that they were going to face.
And some of the wording they used in the petition, the handbooks, and these other things were mistakes.
But those mistakes, once again, if you're going to be evaluated in a very short amount of time, you can't make those mistakes.
It can cause real problems.
And I think maybe it did cause.
Some of these things did cause some real problems.
I am going to toss up a motion and if it flies, so be it.
If it doesn't, so be it.
But I move the CDE recommendation.
And I'll second it.
Is there any further discussion on that?
The recommendation is to deny it.
To deny it.
That's the CDE recommendation.
Any further board comment?
All right.
All those in favor of the motion?
Let's see.
We have six, right?
We have some no vote, no non-voting, right?
I'm a no.
You're a no.
Okay.
All those opposed?
So it's 6-2?
7-2?
So the motion carries.
All right.
So the motion carries and the CDE recommendation carries as well.
So now we're ready for public comment.
Our last item.
These are comments on items that are not on our agenda today.
Do we have any public, general public comment?
Would the following speakers please line up?
Roberto Forcela, Maria Ortiz, and Linda Mattis.
You got out by 6.50?
I need translation.
Patricia went out.
I don't... Can somebody go get her?
Good afternoon.
I'm Maria Ortiz, parent of LAUSD.
You are receiving a letter that is an evidence where the parents are not involved in the decisions that the Board of Education takes.
You are receiving a letter of a policy of involvement of the parents under the law 1116.
You are also receiving a letter about the federal funds
I'm sorry.
It's too much for me.
I give you evidence for about the Title I fund for parenting board, and that district no evidence for monitor that implement with departments.
So, and at the same practice, the parent no participation and significant, I don't mind, I don't mind go.
Okay.
In this moment, the board member no approved the policy, the law 1116.
not approved yet, but in the school approved the policy, no child left behind, and no transition in this moment for the parents and the school.
I'm so sorry, my English is not good.
We have your letter and I'll tell you what, we will ask the state superintendent to look into this since you've made points about federal and state funding.
So it's in our bailiwick and so we understand.
I have your letter and the superintendent will take a look at this.
Okay.
Thank you for support us and help us please.
Bye-bye.
Have a nice day.
Bye.
If there's no more public comment then the board is adjourned.